Dictionary of Analytic Philosophy
J.-M. Kuczynski, PhD
Algorithm: A fixed procedure for carrying out a task. The rules that we learn
in grade school to multiply, add, etc., multi-digit numbers are algorithms. By
formalizing inferences, logicians create algorithms for determining whether,
given two statements, one of them follows from the other.
A problem with algorithms is that what one has to know in order to know
whether a given algorithm is applicable to a given task is often much heftier
than what one would have to know to carry out that task in an ad hoc manner.
In this fact lies the doom of attempts to algorithmize—or, to use the more
popular term—“mechanize” thought.
Ambiguity vs. indexicality: An ambiguous expression is one that is assigned
meaning by two or more different rules. So “dumb” is ambiguous, since there
are two rules that assign meaning to utterances of it. One of those rules is:
given an utterance of “x is dumb,” that utterance is true just in case x cannot
speak. The other is: given an utterance of “x is dumb,” that utterance is true
just in case x is not intelligent.
An “indexical” is a context-sensitive expression. For an expression to be
context-sensitive is for there to be some one semantic rule that assigns
different meanings (or referents) to it, depending on the context. An example
of such expression would be the pronoun “I.” That expression isn’t
ambiguous. Some one semantic rule assigns meaning to any two tokens of it.
(That rule is: given any token t of “I,” t refers to the person who produced t.)
But, that rule being what it is, different tokens of “I” refer to different people.
Ambiguity vs. vagueness: Whereas an expression is ambiguous if it is
assigned meaning by more than one semantic rule, an expression is “vague”
if, supposing it unambiguous, it is assigned meaning by no well-defined
semantic rule, and if, supposing it ambiguous, one of its disambiguations is
assigned meaning by no well-defined semantic rule. Someone with zero hairs
is definitely “bald,” and someone with a million hairs (provided that they’re
suitably located and have the requisite thickness) definitely is “not bald.” But
there are many people with an intermediate number of hairs with respect to
whom neither “bald” nor “not bald” is clearly applicable. Since, therefore, the

semantics of “bald” is given by a rule that is undefined for these intermediate
cases, “bald” is vague.
Like many other expressions, the word “dumb” is both vague and
ambiguous, since it is assigned meaning by two distinct semantic rules,
neither one of which is entirely determinate.
Commentary: There is a raging debate as to what vagueness is. Some hold
that it is a property only of words, thoughts, and the like. Those who hold this
are said to have an epistemic view of vagueness, and are sometimes known as
“epistemicists.” (“Epistemic” means “having to do with knowledge.”) This is
because they see vagueness as a property, not of the thing known, but of our
knowledge of it.
Others hold that vagueness is a property of the thing known, and not, at
least not merely, of our knowledge of it. Those who hold this are said to
believe in “objective” vagueness, the reason being that they believe
vagueness to be a property of objects, as opposed to our methods of
representing them.[1] According to this view, there may be no fact as to
whether Pat is a male or not or as to whether Pat is kind or not, etc. If this is
right, then the law of excluded middle (any given proposition P is either
100% true or 100% false) is false.
Here is my view. There is no objective vagueness. “What’s out there is out
there,” as my former colleague Chris Buford once put it. Talk of vagueness in
the world is projective. We’re projecting deficiencies in our representations
of the world onto the world itself. Vagueness is a property of beliefs,
symbols, and other representations.
Here’s why I say to this. To say of a predicate P that it’s vague is to say
that there is, or at least could be, some object x such that ‹Px› isn’t true and
‹not-Px› isn’t true. There’s nothing mystifying about this sort of vagueness.
Symbols have the meanings we give them. If we decide that Px is true if x is
1, 2, or 3, and false if x is 4, 5, or 6 then ‹P7› isn’t true and neither is ‹not-
P7.› But this isn’t because there is some proposition that is neither true nor
false. It’s because, given how P has been defined, ‹P7› doesn’t encode a
proposition and neither does ‹not-P7.› For a representation or symbol to be
“vague” is simply for it to be under-defined.
But what would it be for a symbol-meaning to be vague? But what would
it be, for example, for a sentence-meaning (a proposition) to be vague?
Propositions are individuated by their entailment-relations. In other words,

a proposition’s identity is a function of what it entails and also of what entails
it. If proposition P1 entails P2, but P3 does not, or P2 entails P1 but not P3, then
P1 and P3 are ipso facto different propositions. Thus, the very idea of a
proposition whose entailment-relations are indeterminate is a non-starter.
This means that propositions always have determinate truth-conditions. After
all, for proposition to have such and such truth-conditions is for such and
such propositions to entail it. Thus, a proposition’s truth-conditions are either
fulfilled or they aren’t. There is no other possibility. Thus, there are no
indeterminate propositions, and the law of excluded middle (every
proposition is either 100% true or 100% false) is correct. See “entailment,”
“propositions.”
Antecedent and consequent: In if P, then Q, P is the antecedent and Q is the
consequent. So in if snow is cold, then snow is not hot, the statement snow is
cold is the antecedent, and snow is not hot is the consequent. See
“conditional.”
Analytic truth: “Squares have four sides” is analytic, since it makes no sense
to suppose that squares might fail to have four sides. “Anything that is literate
is animate” is analytic since it makes no sense to suppose that anything
inanimate should be literate. In general, a statement is analytically true if its
negation is incoherent.
See “coherent,” “empirical truth,” “entailment,” and “meaning vs.
entailment-relations.”
Atomic proposition: A proposition that isn’t molecular (e.g., John snores).
An atomic sentence is a sentence that expresses such a proposition (e.g.,
“John snores”). See “molecular proposition.”
A priori: Knowledge is a priori if one has it, not in virtue of any observations
that one has made, but in virtue of one’s innate cognitive structure of one’s
mind. See “empirical knowledge.”
A posteriori: Knowledge is a posteriori if it isn’t a priori. See “A priori.”
Axiom: A statement that, in some context, is assumed to be true and therefore
isn’t argued for.
Axiom (second definition): A statement-form that, in some context, is

assumed to have a true interpretation. See “interpretation.”
The axiom of comprehension: This is the principle that, given any property,
there is a set containing all and only those objects that have that property.
There is a set containing all and only those things that are people (i.e., that
have the property of being a person). There’s a set containing all and only
those things that are acorns (i.e., that have the property of being an acorn).
And so on.
The axiom of comprehension seems self-evident. But Bertrand Russell
discovered that it has self-contradictory consequences and is therefore false.
The set of people is not a member of itself, since no person is a set. But some
sets do seem to be members of themselves. The set of sets would seem to be
such a set.
In light of these points, consider the property of being a set that contains
all and only those sets that are not members of themselves. Let S be the set
that contains all and only those things that have property. Does S itself have
that property? In other words, is S itself a self-member? If it is, then it isn’t,
since it contains only sets that aren’t self-members. But it if isn’t, then it is,
since it contains every set that is a self-member. Thus:
(i) S has the property of being a self-member
entails its own negation, and so does
(ii) S doesn’t have that property.
Given the axiom of comprehension, one of those two statements must be true.
Since the axiom of comprehension therefore entails a contradiction, it is false.
How exactly it must be modified is a matter of debate. See “axiom,”
“property,” and “set.”
Axiom of extensionality: Sets are identical if and only if they have exactly
the same members.
Axiomatic system: The set of statements consisting of certain axioms along
with the statements that follow from them. See “axiom.”
Axiomatization: To axiomatize a discipline is to identify a small number of
propositions and a small number of inference-rules such that all of the results
of that discipline follow from those propositions by means of those inference

rules. An axiomatization of a discipline is what results when it is successfully
axiomatized. See “inference rule.”
Backtracking counterfactual: See “counterfactual.”
Bound variable: See “open-sentences.”
Causal law: A law to the effect that, if one thing occurs (e.g., fire), some
other thing must occur (e.g., smoke).
Causal inference: An inference based on knowledge of a causal law (e.g., I
see smoke; I know that there is smoke only if there is fire; so I infer that there
is, or was, a fire).
Causal series: A series of events such that, given any two of them, one is the
(in)direct cause of the other; in other words, a single series of events any one
of which is (in)directly caused by some one state of affairs.
Like all series, causal series don’t branch. This is a tautology. A ‘series’ is
defined to be a non-branching structure.
Of course, just a river can fork, so a causal series can branch out. In fact,
the forking of a river is a special cause of the branching out of a causal series.
But for a river to fork is for it to become two rivers (supposing that the two
tributaries don’t later merge). It isn’t for a river to become two independent
streams of water. Similarly, for a causal series to branch is for it to become
multiple series. It is not for a series to comprise independent tributaries.
Class: Synonymous (in this work, though not in others) with “set.” See “set.”
Coherence and incoherence: An “incoherent” statement is one that
undermines itself. Consider the statement:
(BC) “Bill has four cars, but he doesn’t have more than one car.”
BC is self-defeating. Its own meaning prevents it from being true. Therefore
it is “incoherent.”
It’s clear that any statement to the effect that someone had four cars while
having no more than one car would be incoherent. So the concept of such a
person is one that couldn’t be actualized; and any statement to the effect that
it was actualized would be incoherent. Such concepts are described as
“incoherent.” (In this context, the term “concept” is synonymous with the

term “condition,” and the expression “to actualize a concept” is synonymous
with the expression “to fulfill a condition.”)
Concepts are conditions. To actualize a concept is to fulfill a condition.

“Ceteris paribus”: Synonymous with “other things being equal” and “holding
all other factors constant.” Ceteris paribus, a person with money is more
likely to be happy than a person with no money. In other words, given two
otherwise comparable people, one of whom has money, the other of whom
does not, the former is more likely to be happy than the latter. But if the
former has a painful chronic illness and his dreams have been all been
shattered (etc.) whereas the former is in the pink of health and he feels
himself to be on the cusp of success, the latter will probably be happier than
the former.
Coherently conceivable circumstance (or scenario): A circumstance is
coherently conceivable just in case one is not guilty of self-contradiction in
virtue of believing it to hold. So even though Kerry is not the U.S. President
in 2007, the proposition Kerry is U.S. President in 2007 is not self-
undermining—it isn’t like x is knowledge but not belief or 1 + 1 = 3. So
while all beliefs requiring the existence of circumstances that are not
coherently conceivable are false, not all false beliefs require the existence of
such circumstances. See “coherence and incoherence.”
Compatibilism: The doctrine that there can be personal freedom in a
deterministic world. “Incompatibilism” is the doctrine that compatibilism is
false. See “determinism” and “incompatibilism.”
Compatible: P and Q are compatible statements if they can both be true.
Thus, P and Q are compatible if, supposing that the one is true, it doesn’t
follow that the other is false. “So JM is a philosophy professor” is compatible
with “JM is more grouchy than Steve Carey,” since they can both be true. See
“entailment” and “incompatible.”
Complex expressions vs. simple expressions: Some expressions are simple
(e.g., “Smith”), while others are complex (e.g., “the man that the dog bit”).
All sentences are complex—that is, they consist of multiple expressions.
At first, it appears as though there are exceptions to this. Consider the
sentence “leave!” This seems simple. But it isn’t; that is because there is a
hidden (or “phonetically unrealized,” meaning that there is no overt,
acoustical, or visual representation of them in that word) occurrence of
“you”—that sentence means: you—leave. Also, the verb leave has various
semantic properties (e.g., tense, mood) that, although they are not

phonetically marked, are nonetheless present, and make it a complex
expression.
Genuinely simple expressions are known as “morphemes.”
Compositionality: According to the principle of compositionality, the
meaning of a complex expression is a function of the meanings of its
constituents; and the referent of a complex expression is a function of the
referents of its constituents.
The meaning of:
(TY) “the author of War and Peace was friendly to the author of Crime and
Punishment”
is different from that of
(DO) “the author of War and Peace was mean to the author of Crime and
Punishment.”
Why do TY and DO have different meanings? Because “friendly” and
“mean” don’t mean the same thing. Replacing “friendly” with “mean,” or
vice versa, turns a sentence having one meaning into a sentence having a very
different meaning. This shows that what TY means depends on what
“friendly” means. Semanticists express this by saying that TY’s meaning is
“a function of ” what “friendly” means. What DO means is a clearly function
of what “mean” means. In general, what expressions mean is a function of
what the expressions composing them mean. See “special compositionality,”
“function,” and “functor.”

Compound sentence: Same as a molecular sentence. Thus, a compound
sentence is one that consists of other sentences (e.g., “snow is white and grass
is green”). See “molecular sentence.”
Conceptual role semantics (CRS): the view that meaning is use, i.e., for two
expressions to mean the same thing is for them to be used in the same way
and, therefore, that for a given expression to have this, as opposed to that,
meaning is for it to be used in this, as opposed to that, way.
In his (1963) paper “Some reflections on language games,” Wilfrid Sellars
clearly puts forth a version of CRS. But it’s quite definitely present in
Wittgenstein’s book The Philosophical Investigations, which was completed
in the late 40’s. In his (1994) book Making it explicit, Robert Brandom
advocates CRS. Nowhere in that 900 page book, or in any writings of
advocates of CRS, is the existence of any of the following reasonable
positions so much as acknowledged, let alone addressed:
(i) A knowledge of a word’s meaning is at least part of what guides a person
to use it in the way she does. When the waiter asks you what you would like
to eat, you say “I’d like a bowl of clam chowder,” and not “I’d like a bowl of
rotten entrails.” Why do you say “clam chowder” instead of “rotten entrails”?
Because you know that, given what it is that you want, “rotten entrails” has
the wrong meaning and “clam chowder” has the right meaning. Of course,
how an expression is used is likely to change its meaning. If enough people
use the word “restive” to mean tired, it may well come to have that meaning.
But until that time comes, those people are misusing that expression; and
their usage of it, being discrepant from its actual meaning, can’t possibly be
constitutive of it.
(ii) Mere noises aren’t linguistic expressions. It is only noises coupled with
meanings that are such expressions. In a world where there are no semantic
conventions, a noise just like the noise you make when you say “snow is
white” would mean nothing. If, in such a world, the gases leaving a volcano
happened to make that noise, they would mean nothing. (In fact, they’d mean
nothing in our world, except at most in some derivative sense.) Since,
therefore, noises must be coupled with meanings in order to qualify as
linguistic expressions, it makes no sense to say that what an expression
means is a function of how it is used. After all, there is no expression to be
used until the noises (and ink-marks and so forth) have been coupled with

meanings. Therefore, CRS is false.
Of course, there are different views as to what meanings are, and there are
different views as to what it is for noises to be coupled with them. But
relative to any such view, CRS is false.
The contention that is closest to CRS that isn’t obviously false is the trivial
contention that what noises (and ink-marks and the like) mean is a (partial)
causal consequence of what people do with them. (This suggests that CRS is
based on a failure to distinguish the concept of a logical consequence from
that of a causal consequence.)
(iii) Expressions that haven’t ever been used have determinate meanings.
There are infinitely many sentences of English that haven’t been used but that
have determinate meanings. If this weren’t the case, then nobody could ever
utter a new sentence of English, at least not without making some ad hoc
extension to the English language. But previously unuttered sentences are
uttered all the time; and no sooner are they uttered than they have determinate
meanings.
According to CRS, what an expression means is determined by how it is
used. So if CRS is right, an expression that hasn’t been used ipso facto has no
meaning.
To parry this, advocates of CRS would have to say the following. “Where
some expressions are concerned, meaning is fixed by use. But where other
expressions are concerned, use doesn’t fix meaning, at least not single-
handedly. Some other factor is at work.”
In making this concession, the advocate of CRS is admitting that CRS is
false. Setting this aside, let us ask: what is this other factor?
The answer: syntax. The meaning of “Bob kicked the can” is a function of
(i) what each of its components means (in other words, it’s a function of what
is meant by each of “Bob,” “kick,” and so on); and it’s also a function of (ii)
the syntactic rules of English (in other words, it’s a function of the rules that
assign meanings to complex expressions on the basis of the meanings of their
constituents).
Thus, the meaning of a complex expression is not determined by its use,
and is determined by existing semantic and syntactic conventions. So CRS is
false, if taken as an analysis of complex expressions. Earlier, we saw why it’s
false if taken as an analysis of simple expressions.
(iv) If the meaning of a sentence S were determined by its “conceptual

role”—that is, by what people inferred from S, when they thought it correct
—any inference that people made from S would ipso facto be constitutive of
S’s meaning. If enough people thought that “Stalin the dictator of the Soviet
Union from 1923–1953” entailed “somebody who was over 6 ft tall was the
dictator of the Soviet Union from 1923–1953,” the former would entail the
latter. But even if the latter were correct (which it isn’t since Stalin was
barely over 5 ft tall), it wouldn’t follow from the first sentence.
In their (2001) book The Compositionality Papers, Jerry Fodor and Ernie
Lepore put forth several blistering criticisms of CRS. In that work, any gaps
in the criticisms of CRS just put forth are very much filled in.
Conditional: A conditional statement is one that has the form if P, then Q.
Conditional statements play a vital role in logic, since logic is the discipline
that attempts to determine what follows from what, and any statement to the
effect that one statement follows from another is expressed by a conditional.
Confirm: For P to confirm Q is for P to provide support for Q. (P: ‘Smith’s
fingerprints are found in the murder-weapon used to kill Jones.’ Q: “Smith
killed Jones.” P supports Q.) Confirmation is defeasible, meaning that, even
if P confirms Q, some other statement might provide more support for not-Q
than P provides for Q. (R: “There is a video-tape of Brown killing Smith,
then pressing the hand of Smith, who is at the crime-scene but unconscious,
around the murder-weapon, and then leaving it at the scene.”) Entailment is
not defeasible. A consequence is that P cannot, if true, entail Q without Q’s
being true. See “confirmation.”
Confirmation: P confirms Q if, supposing that P is true, it’s possible that Q is
false but it’s more likely than not that Q is true. “Smith is a Harvard
professor” confirms “Smith is not a complete moron,” but it doesn’t entail it.
See “confirm” and “entailment.”
Conjunct: In P and Q, each of P and Q is a “conjunct.” So snow is white is
one of the conjuncts of snow is white and grass is green. See “conjunction.”
Conjunction: A conjunction is any sentence composed of two sentences that
are joined by an “and” or a “but” or an “although”—or any other connective
whose purpose is to indicate that both of the sentences thereby joined are
true.

Connective: A “connective” expression is one that, given one or more
sentences, enables a new sentence to be formed. So, “if ” is a connective
since, given the sentences “grass is green” and “snow is white,” it yields the
sentence “if grass is green, then snow is white.” All conjunctions (“and,”
“or,” “but”) are connectives. So is “not.” This is because “snow is not white”
says the same thing as “it is not the case that snow is white,” which is what
results when the expression “it is not the case” is coupled with “snow is
white.”
“It is possible” (or “possibly”) is a connective, since it yields “it is
possible that John is home” when given the sentence “John is home.”
“Sally believes” is a connective since it yields “Sally believes that John is
home” when given the sentence “John is home.”
“And,” “if,” and “or” are two-place connectives, meaning that they form
sentences out of pairs of sentences. “Not,” “it is possible that,” and “John
believes that” are one-place connectives, since they form sentences out of
single sentences.
Commentary: A connective can be thought of as a sentence-level adjective.
That is, it can be thought of as an expression C such that, given a sentence S,
C yields a new sentence C(S) (read: “C of S”) such that C(S) attributes some
characteristic to the proposition (or open proposition) expressed by S. For
example, “Fred knows that” is a connective. And if you say “Fred knows that
snow is white,” you are attributing a property to the proposition that snow is
white; you are saying of that proposition that it has the property that Fred
knows it to be true. “Because” is a connective, and if you say “snow is white
because grass is green,” you are seeing of the propositions that snow is white
and grass is green that the former is a causal consequence of the latter. One
last example: “for all x” is a connective, and if you say “for all x, x is a
mammal if x is a whale,” you are attributing a characteristic (that of being
correct) to each of infinitely many propositions. (That is why, even though
“for all x” and other quantifiers don’t operate on sentences, they nonetheless
qualify as connectives.
Connectives attribute properties to propositions. This is what quantifiers
do. In fact, quantifiers do it on an even larger scale than other connectives.
Consider the quantifier “for all x.” When coupled with the open sentence “x
is tall,” this yields a sentence (“for all x, x is tall”) that says of an infinitely
large class of propositions (viz. those having the form x is tall) that each of

its members is true. (By contrast, “Fred believes that,” when coupled with
“Jim is tall,” yields a sentence (“Fred believes that Jim is tall”) that attributes
a property (that of being believed by Fred) to only one proposition.) That is
why, even though quantifiers operate on open sentences, whereas other
connectives operate on actual sentences, quantifiers are generally treated as
connectives.
A sentence can have more than one connective. An example of such a
sentence would be:
(*) “either Jim is in Idaho and Larry is in Idaho with Jim, or Larry is in
Delaware and Fred is with Larry in Delaware.”
The main connective of (*) is “or.” Why is it the main connective? (*)
attributes a property to the set containing the propositions either Jim is in
Idaho and Larry is in Idaho with Jim and Larry is in Delaware and Fred is
with Larry in Delaware. The property that it attributes to that set is the
property of containing at least one true member. The other connectives
occurring in (*) don’t attribute properties to that pair of propositions; they
attribute properties to propositions composing the propositions composing
(*). That is why none of those connectives is the main connective. I leave it
to the reader as an exercise to produce an explicit definition of the term “main
connective” on the basis of these remarks.
Consequentialism: The doctrine that it is entirely in virtue of what its effects
are that an act is morally right or wrong. See “deontology” and
“utilitarianism.”
Consistent/inconsistent: If two statements are compatible, they are
“consistent” with each other; otherwise they are inconsistent with each other.
“Consistent” and “compatible” mean the same thing. See “compatible.”
Consistent/inconsistent (in connection with axiomatic systems): When an
axiomatic system is described as “consistent” what is meant is that, given any
two statements composing it, they are consistent with each other. An
axiomatic system is “inconsistent” if it doesn’t satisfy this condition. See
“axiom” and “axiomatic system.”
Content: The content of a statement or a belief is what must hold for it to be
correct.

Content-externalism: Let X and Y be two creatures that are qualitatively
identical except for the fact that the causes of X’s current condition aren’t
qualitatively identical with those of Y’s current condition. According to
content-externalism, the content of X’s thoughts and perceptions may, in
virtue of that fact, be different from the contents of Y’s corresponding
thoughts and perceptions. See “semantic externalism.”
Contingent: A proposition is contingent if there are coherently conceivable
circumstances where it is a true and also conceivable circumstance where it is
false (e.g., Mary owns a BMW).
Counterfactual: a statement of the form: if P were the case, then Q would
also be the case (e.g., if Kennedy hadn’t been assassinated, he would have
been reelected in 1964).
A backtracking counterfactual is one of the form: “if P were the case at
time t, then Q would have been the case at time t*, “where t* is earlier than
t.” For example, “if Jim now had alcohol on his breath, then it would have
been the case that he had been drinking earlier today.”
Counterfactual analysis of causality: The position that x caused y to occur
just in case, if x hadn’t happened, y wouldn’t have happened. According to
this view, for the button’s being pushed to cause the elevator to come is for it
to be the case that the elevator wouldn’t have come if the button hadn’t been
pushed. In Chapter 17, it is shown why this view is false.
Contextual definition: See “denotative vs. ostensive vs. descriptive vs.
contextual definition.”
Defeasible: A tendency or principle is “defeasible” if it can be overridden.
Definite description: Expressions of the form ‹the phi›, where phi is in the
singular, are known as “definite descriptions.” So “the inventor of Velcro,” is
a definite description, as is “the inventor of bifocals.” See “quantifier.”
Define/definition: To define an expression is to say what it means.
Expressions are defined, not objects. “Bill Clinton” is defined, not Bill
Clinton.
Definition by abstraction: In some cases, it can be said what it is for two
things, x and y, to share some property P without using any expression that

refers to P. In such cases, it is possible to translate statements in which
expressions referring to that property occur into statements in which such
expressions don’t occur; and when this is done, the property in question is
thereby defined in abstraction.
For example, two lines have the same direction (i.e., share the property of
pointing in a given direction) if they don’t intersect. Thus, the direction D of
a given line L may be defined as the class of all lines L* that don’t intersect
with L, and “y has direction D” may be seen as saying the same thing as “y
doesn’t intersect with L.”
Demonstrative: Some indexicals must be accompanied by an act of
demonstration—an act of pointing, or some equivalent—if they are to
succeed in picking out their target. If, while in the presence of 10 people, I
say to you “that person is a bore,” what I’ve said is ambiguous. But if, under
the same circumstances, I utter the same sentence while pointing to Charlie,
then my utterance of “that person” picks out Charlie, and my utterance is not
ambiguous. An utterance of “that person” refers to the person who is salient
in the context of utterance. There is thus a rule that assigns referents to tokens
of “that person,” that rule being if “that person” is uttered in a context in
which x is a uniquely salient person, then that utterance picks out x. What
that refers to is therefore systematically context-sensitive, that being why it’s
an indexical. And sometimes an act of pointing is needed to make somebody
be uniquely contextually salient, that being why it’s a demonstrative, as
opposed to a mere indexical. Other examples of demonstratives are “this
pain,” “these little creatures,” and “that aardvark.” See “indexical.”
Denotative vs. ostensive vs. descriptive vs. contextual definition: For an
expression to be defined ostensively is for it to be defined by means of an act
of pointing. If, having been asked who “Ludwig” refers to, I say “that guy,”
while pointing to Ludwig, I’ve defined “Ludwig” ostensively.
Ostensive definitions are always cases of denotative definitions, but not
vice versa. For an expression to be defined denotatively is for it to be defined
by identifying some entity that it picks out. This is how proper names are
defined. “Socrates” is defined denotatively—you learn what “Socrates”
means by being told who it refers to. But since he’s no longer around, it isn’t
defined ostensively.
Not all expressions can be defined denotatively, and such expressions
must be defined contextually. “Something” doesn’t pick anything out.

Therefore, it can’t be defined denotatively. Its meaning is given by the rule
that, for any phi, ‹something has phi› is true exactly if phi is instantiated.
Other examples: The meaning of “every person” is given by the rule that, for
any phi, ‹every person has phi› means that the property of being a human
non-phi isn’t instantiated. The meaning of “not” is given by the rule that, for
any sentence S, not-S is true just in case S is false. The meaning of “no
aardvark” is given by the rule that, for any phi, ‹no aardvark has phi› is true
exactly if the property of not being both an aardvark and a phi is universally
instantiated. See “define/definition.”
Commentary—A principle concerning contextual definition: Whenever an
expression is defined contextually, as opposed to denotatively, whole
sentences containing it must be reparsed if their meanings are to be made
clear. We just saw this with “something.” Its meaning is given by the rule
that, for any property psi:
(SP) ‹something has psi›
means
(PS) the property of being a psi is instantiated.
PS doesn’t have the same form as SP. PS is a wholesale reparsing of SP; and
the reason is obviously that “someone” is defined contextually. The same is
true of all expressions that are defined contextually.
For any psi, ‹something has psi› attributes a property to another property,
and not to an individual. (In analytic philosophy, the term “individual” refers,
not only to people, but to anything that isn’t itself a property—to rocks, trees,
galaxies, etc.) “Someone is tall” attributes the property of being instated to
the property of tallness.
Additional commentary: All denotative definitions are contextual definitions,
but not vice versa. To say that, for some object x, “Smith” refers to x is to say
that, for any phi, ‹Smith has phi› is to the effect that x has phi. So in defining
“Smith” by identifying its referent, one is giving its meaning by saying what
is meant by whole sentences of the form ‹...Smith...› This principle is
defended in Chapter 7.
Denote: As we’ll use them, the terms “denote” and “refer to” are
synonymous, the same therefore being true of “denotation” and “referent” are

synonymous. See “refer.”
Deontology: The doctrine that it is in virtue, not of what its effects are, but of
whether it embodies due
regard for one’s ethical duties and for other people’s rights that an act is
morally right or wrong. See “consequentialism.”
Determinism: The doctrine that nothing is uncaused. Everything that
happens/has happened/will happen has to happen and, moreover, has to
happen in the exact way in which it happens.
Alternate definition of determinism: how the world is at any point fixes how
the world will be, in every respect, at all later times. See “indeterminism.”
Descriptive proposition: A proposition is descriptive if it isn’t normative. In
other words, a proposition is descriptive if it, supposing it is correct, says
how things are, not how they should be. Killing is frequent, especially during
war is not a normative statement, since it merely says how things are, not
how they should be. See “proposition” and “normative proposition.”
Disjunct: In P or Q, each of P and Q is a “disjunct.” See “disjunction.”
Disjunction: A disjunction is any sentence composed of two sentences that
are joined by an “or.” For example, either it’s raining or somebody turned the
sprinkler on.
Duhem-Quine thesis: The thesis, which was advocated by W.V.O. Quine
(1908–2001)[2], that no theory does either a better job or a worse job than any
other theory of modeling any given body of data. In other words, given any
body of observations B and given any two theories T and T*, T does no
better and no worse a job than T* of modeling B.
Quine’s argument was that, given any datum D that appears to confirm T
and to disconfirm T*, one can make D disconfirm T and disconfirm T* by
tinkering with one’s background assumptions.
Quine’s thesis is either empty or it’s false. Scientific theories aren’t
analytically entailed by the observations that support them. Induction isn’t
deduction. This is an obvious triviality. So, assuming that what Quine is
saying isn’t trivial, it must be to the effect that no theory does a better job or a
worse job than any other theory of accounting for any given body of data. To
account for a body of data is to show that the occurrence of each datum

composing it is non-anomalous. Thus, Quine’s thesis, supposing it non-
trivial, is to the effect that no theory does a better job than any other theory of
removing causal anomalies from any given body of data.
Thus interpreted, Quine’s thesis is clearly false. The acne of each of the
millions of acne-sufferers who takes medication X gets ten times worse
within ten minutes of the time at which said acne-sufferer takes X. Theory T
entails that anyone who has acne who takes X will immediately be cured of
his acne forever. Rival theory T* entails that theory T is false. According to
Quine, by tinkering around with background assumptions, T models the
observational data as well as T*. But that’s clearly false.
Quine says that, in situations like this, we should “plead hallucination.” In
other words, we should assume that the observations in question, most of
which are had by people who do not otherwise have any history of
hallucinations, are hallucinations. If we make this assumption, we’re stuck
with a huge number of otherwise non-existent anomalies. We’re stuck having
to explain, or to regard it as incapable of explanation, why it is that people
who never had hallucinations before all of a sudden started hallucinating; and
we are also stuck having to explain/regard as inexplicable why it is that
people who did have hallucinations before all of a sudden started having
acne-related hallucinations that, in terms of their content and in terms of their
etiology, are completely unlike the hallucinations they had previously.
Empirical knowledge, analytic knowledge, synthetic, a priori, a posteriori:
Empirical knowledge is knowledge that is based at least partly on the
testimony of the senses. Not all knowledge is empirical; some is analytic.
Analytic knowledge is knowledge that is arrived at strictly through the
analysis of concepts.
Synthetic knowledge is non-analytic knowledge.
A priori knowledge is knowledge that is constitutive of our cognitive
machinery; it’s knowledge that is hardwired into us and that we therefore
don’t acquire.
A posteriori knowledge is knowledge that is not a priori.
Empirical truth: An empirical truth is one that can be known only through
sensory observation. It is only on the basis of sense-perception that one can
know that Barack Obama is currently the U.S. President. That is why “Barack
Obama is currently the U.S. President” expresses an empirical truth. See
“analytic truth.”

Empiricism: The doctrine that all knowledge is derived from sense-
perception. See “rationalism” and “sense-perception.”
Commentary: Many hold that it’s “scientific” to accept empiricism and
“unscientific” to reject it. If, by “scientific,” one means “indicative of an
inability to grasp principles of any sophistication,” this is correct. Otherwise,
it’s false. If all knowledge were observation-based, knowledge of that very
fact couldn’t be observation-based. In order for observation to tell you
anything, it must be presupposed that observation is a source of knowledge.
Therefore, observation can tell you that observation is the only source of
knowledge only if it’s known independently of observation that observation
is the only source of knowledge. So, were it known that all knowledge was
observation-based, it wouldn’t be a truth that all knowledge was observation-
based. Therefore, empiricism, if true, is either false or it cannot be known to
be true. Therefore, empiricism is incoherent, and therefore false, or false.
Therefore, it’s false.
Encode: Anything that has a meaning is said to encode it. The content of a
perception (i.e., what it tells you) is what it is “coded into it” (i.e., is what is
encoded in it).
Entailment/entails: P entails Q just in case it’s impossible for Q to be false if
P is true. Thus Smith has five cars entails Smith has more than one car, since
it isn’t possible for the second to be false if the first is true.
P entails Q if P is incompatible with not-Q. See “incompatible.”
Entailment (alternate definition): P entails Q just in case there is no
coherently conceivable circumstance where P is true and Q is false. So x is a
triangle entails x has three sides because there is no coherently conceivable
circumstance where the first is true and the second is false. See “coherently
conceivable circumstance.”
Entailment (Second alternative definition): P entails the negation of Q just
in case P and Q are incompatible. See “compatible.”
Epistemic operator: An epistemic operator is one that, when joined with a
sentence, yields a sentence that describes somebody’s beliefs or thoughts or
feelings about the proposition expressed by the original sentence. Thus,
“Jerry believes” is an epistemic operator, since, when placed in front of “that

1 + 1 = 2,” yields:
(iii) “Jerry believes that 1 + 1 = 2,”
which describes Jerry’s attitude towards the proposition meant by “1 + 1 =
2.” And “Laura fears that” is an epistemic operator since, when placed in
front of “that law school will be intolerably boring” yields
(iv) “Laura fears that law school will be intolerably boring,”
which describes Laura’s attitude towards the proposition meant by “that law
school will be intolerably boring.”
Any sentence containing an operator also contains an expression denoting
a proposition; and, in that sentence, that operator is attributing some property
to that proposition. (iii) contains the operator “it is possible that.” It also
contains “that 1 + 1 = 2,” which denotes a proposition. And (iii) ascribes a
property (that of being possible) to that proposition. See “modal operator”
and “operator.”
Equivalence: P and Q are equivalent if each entails the other. This means that
there is no coherently conceivable situation where the one holds but the other
does not. So 1 + 1 = 2 and triangles have three sides are equivalent. Note:
two statements that are equivalent may have little or nothing to do with each
other in terms of content. We’ll revisit this point later. See “equivalent.”
Equivalent: Two statements are equivalent if they entail each other. P and Q
are equivalent iff P↔Q
Commentary: Equivalent statements cannot differ in truth-value; in other
words, they are both true or both false (one can’t be true while the other is
false). But non-equivalent statements can have the same truth-value. (“JMK
is a U.S. citizen” is true, and so is “JMK is a philosopher professor.” But
they’re not equivalent.).See “entails.”
“Exactly if”: A synonym of “iff” (which is short for “if and only if”) and
“exactly if” and “just in case.” See “iff.”
Existential generalization (first meaning): It’s obvious that some sentences
have the form “there is at least one thing that has property phi.” Here are
some examples:

(i) “There is at least one thing that is a human that plays golf,”

(ii) “At least one number greater than two is an even prime.”
(iii) At least one person wrote a book called War and Peace.
(i)–(iii) are known as existence-claims, since each says that there exists a
thing of a certain kind. Another term for “existence-claim” is existential-
generalization. Existence-claims don’t always begin with “there is.” Often
they begin with “something” or “someone.” Thus:
(iii*) “someone wrote a book called War and Peace.”
is an existence-claim.
The differences between (iii) and (iii*) aren’t relevant to what we’re
doing. As far as we’re concerned, they’re the same statement.
Existential generalization (second meaning): An inference of the form “O
has phi; therefore, something or other has phi,”—for example, “Bob is over
7-feet tall. Therefore, something is over 7-feet tall.”
Export/exportation: To “export” an expression occurring in some sentence is
to move it from the inside of that sentence to the outside. Consider the
sentence “snow is not white.” That is equivalent with “it is not the case that
snow is white.” In the latter sentence, the negation-sign has been pushed to
the outside of the sentence. For this reason, the second sentence, unlike the
first, makes it clear that the scope of the negation is (in each sentence) an
entire sentence (viz. “snow is white”). Making the meanings of sentences
clear almost often involves expression-exportation.
Expression-types vs. expression-tokens: A given word can occur on several
occasions. There have been countless utterances of the word “snow.” An
utterance (or inscription) of that word is called a token of that word. The
word itself is called a “word-type.” So word-tokens are bits of noise, ink, etc.
Word-types are things of which these noises (etc.) are instances.
“Exactly if”: See “iff.”
Epistemically possible: A statement S is epistemically possible iff, given only
what you know, it isn’t ruled out. So if, given only the data at your disposal,
it cannot be ruled out that Smith is not in Greenland, then “Smith is not in
Greenland” is an epistemic possibility. It’s obvious that epistemic possibility

is a relative notion. At a given time, a given statement may be epistemically
possible to some and not epistemically possible to others; and a given
statement may be epistemically possible to a given person at one time but not
at some other time. (If you go to Greenland, and see that Smith is there, then
it’s no longer epistemically possible—for you—that Smith is not in
Greenland.)
Equivalent: Two statements are equivalent if each entails the other. See
“entails.”
Form of an expression: The sentences:
(i) “Sally hates Bob”
and
(ii) “Bob adores Amanda”
have the form
(iii) x bears relation R to y.
This is because (i) is what results when the variables in (iii) are replaced
with constants, and so is (ii). In general, for two sentences S1 and S2 to have
the same form is for there to be some open-sentence S3 such that each of S1
and S2 is what results when the free variables in S3 are replaced with
constants.
Formal entailment: See “formal truth.”
Formal truth: Formal truth is a property of sentences.[3] A sentence is
formally true if every sentence having the same form is true. So “if Bill is
tall, then it is not the case that it is not the case that Bill is tall” is formally
true, since every sentence of the form “if S, then not S” is true. That sentence
is also an example of a formal entailment. S1 formally entails S2 if the
sentence “if S1, then S2” is formally true.
Formalization: To formalize a discipline is to identify a set of open-
sentences such that every proposition belonging to that discipline is either an

instance of one of those open-sentences or is a formal consequence of some
interpretation of those open-sentences.
Free variable: See “open-sentences.”
Function: A rule that assigns no more than one object to each object in some
specified class of objects. Thus, the rule that assigns the number two to the
number one, and the number four to the number two, etc., is a function. (In
other words, F(x) = 2x is a function.) But, importantly, not all functions
involve numbers—a fact that Frege turned to good account.
Functionalism: The doctrine that for x to be a mental state of a given kind
(e.g., for it to be a belief that snow is white) is for it to have certain effects
and certain causes. (More formally: given any mental category M, there are
certain causes and certain effects such that, given any entity x, x falls into M
iff x has those causes and those effects.) Thus, anything that has the causes
and effects of (say) a belief that snow is white is itself, for that very reason, a
belief that snow is white. See “materialism.”
Hedonism (first meaning): The psychological doctrine that nobody can do
anything other than pursue his or own pleasure. One problem with this
doctrine is that not all forms of well-being are identical with the experiencing
of pleasure. In fact, not all forms of enjoyment are identical with pleasure. I
enjoy playing tennis. I experience pleasure when I have a few beers. My
agency is implicated in the enjoyment I derive from tennis. The joy I derive
from tennis is joy that I earn. By contrast, the joy I derive from alcohol is not
joy that I earn. My agency isn’t involved. (My agency is involved in lifting
the bottle to my mouth. But whereas that act is only a means to the actual
source of pleasure—namely, the biochemical reactions that take place in my
liver—the act of hitting a good backhand is itself a source of joy; it is
constitutively, as opposed to merely instrumentally, involved in the joy I
experience when I play tennis.) The word “pleasure” denotes enjoyment of
this (non-agential) kind. The contempt that puritans have for pleasure is
rooted in the fact that, whereas one’s agency and, therefore, one’s self are
implicated in the joy that (for example) playing tennis brings, they are not
implicated in the joy brought by narcotics-use and (with some qualifications)
by sexual activity. So even though it probably isn’t psychologically healthy
to have such a severe attitude towards such pleasures, the puritan’s view of

them embodies the important insight that, so far as one seeks pleasure, one
seeks an effacement of self. Thus, a certain respect for human beings (qua
agents) is inherent in the puritan’s view, and a respect for people (qua agents)
is absent from the hedonist’s view. Where the puritan goes wrong is in his
failure to see that a psychobiological prerequisite for mental health, and thus
for retention of one’s agency, is a certain amount of passive gratification.
Hedonism (second meaning): The ethical doctrine that nobody ought to do
anything other than pursue his or own pleasure.

Higher-order property: A property of a property. The property of being a
bird has many properties. It has the property of being such that there are
instances of it. In other words, it has the property of being instantiated.
The property of being a golden mountain does not have that property,
since there are no instances of it. It thus has the property of being
uninstantiated.
Instantiatedness and un-instantiatedness are the two most important
higher-order properties.
The property of being a person has the property of being such that each of
its instances also has the property of being a mammal.
Many sentences (propositions) that appear to be about individuals are in
fact about properties. Frege discovered this, and it is undoubtedly the most
important insight in the history of semantics. The expressions “exist” and
“doesn’t exist” refer to higher-order properties. So “even numbers exist”
means: the property of being an even number is instantiated. Thus, when
appropriately re-parsed, “exist” proves to mean is instantiated and “even
number,” in that context, proves to mean the property of being an even
number.
And “even prime numbers greater than two don’t exist” means: the
property of being an even number greater than two is un-instantiated. Thus,
when that sentence is duly re-parsed, “don’t exist” means is un-instantiated,
and (in that context) “even prime numbers greater than two” means: the
property of being an even number greater than two.
“Iff,” “just in case,” “exactly if,” “↔’: “Iff ” abbreviates “if and only if.” “P
iff Q” means that P and Q are equivalent. “just in case” and “exactly if” are
synonyms of “iff.” So “P just in case Q” means the same thing as “P iff Q,”
and each means the same thing as “P exactly if Q”; and each of those means
the same thing as “P→Q.”
Incompatibilism: The doctrine that there cannot be personal freedom in a
deterministic world. “Compatibilism” is the doctrine that incompatibilism is
false. See “determinism” and “compatibilism.”
Incompatible: P and Q are incompatible if they can’t both be true. Thus, P
and Q are incompatible if, supposing that the one is true, the other is false. So
JM is a philosophy professor is incompatible with JM is not an instructor of
any kind, since they cannot both be true. See “compatible.”

Identity of Indiscernibles: If x has every property that y has, and vice versa,
then x is numerically identical with y.
Indeterminism: The doctrine that some things are uncaused. See
“determinism.”
Indexical: An indexical is an expression whose referent depends in a
systematic manner on the context of utterance. (More precisely, an indexical
is an expression-type E such that the semantic rule for E is to the effect that
what a given token of E refers to is a function of some fact about the context
of utterance.) If, on April 25, 2009, I say “today it’s sunny,” my utterance of
“today” picks out April 25, 2009. If, on Feb. 4, 2024, I say “today it’s not
sunny,” my utterance of “today” picks out Feb. 4, 2024. (That is why those
utterances don’t contradict each other and, therefore, can both be true.) In
general, an utterance of “today” refers to the day on which that utterance
occurs. Thus, what such an utterance refers to depends in a principled (rule-
governed) and therefore systematic way on some fact about the context.
Thus, “today” is an indexical. Other examples of indexicals are: “yesterday,”
“now,” and “here.” See “ambiguity.”
Indicative conditional: A conditional that isn’t a counterfactual conditional.
In other words, the antecedent of an indicative conditional isn’t assumed to
be false (though it isn’t assumed to be true). “If Smith is at the airport, then
he’s probably at the baggage carousel” is an indicative conditional, since it is
left open whether or not Smith is at the airport. “If Smith had been at the
airport, he would have been at the baggage carousel” is a counterfactual
conditional, since it is being presumed that Smith was not at the airport. See
“conditional” and “counterfactual.”
Indiscernibility of Identicals: Same as Leibniz’s Law (if x has every
property that y has, and vice versa, x and y are numerically identical). See
“numerical identity.”
Individual: In analytic philosophy, the word “individual” has two meanings.
First meaning: An individual is anything about which statements are being
made. Rocks, trees, and lizards are individuals in a given context, provided
that, in that context, statements are being made about them. If, in that context,
no statements are being made about the property of being green, then, in that
context, that property doesn’t qualify as an “individual.” But in other contexts

it might so qualify. Second meaning: Individuals are discrete, spatiotemporal
entities—they are “things,” in the narrowest sense of the word. For reasons
that are given in Chapter 16, this means that an individual is any causal
series. See “causal series.”
Informal analytic truth: A statement is analytically true if it’s non-
empirically true (i.e., if its negation is prohibited from being true by the
structures of concepts and by logical laws). An analytic truth is informal if
other statements of the same form are false. Thus, any case of knowledge is a
case of belief is an analytic truth, since its negation is incoherent, and it’s not
formally true since it has the same form as any case of knowledge is a case of
happiness, which is false. See “analytic” and “entailment.”
Instance of an open-sentence: Given some open-sentence O, if some actual
sentence S is what results when the free variables in O are replaced with
constants, S is an instance of O. So “Smith is tall” is an instance of ‹x is tall›,
and “Smith is tall” is also an instance of ‹Smith has property phi.› See “open-
sentence” and “quasi-quotation.”
Instance of a property: If something has a property, then it is an instance of
that property. We are all instances of the property of being human. Instances
of properties are not identical with those properties themselves. I am not
identical with the property of being human since my fellow humans are not
instances of me. See “instantiate” and “property.”
Instantiate: Anything that has a given property is an instance of it; and
anything that is an instance of a given property instantiates it. You are
human; so you instantiate the property of being human. See “property” and
“instance.”
Intensional vs. extensional definition: If a class has infinitely many
members, then it must be defined intensionally. An intensional definition of a
class is one that picks out the members of that class by citing some property
had by all and only those members. So the class of even numbers is
intensionally defined as the class that contains every number that is divisible
by two and that doesn’t contain anything else.
If a class has only finitely many members, then it is possible to give an
enumerative definition of it. Consider the class of even numbers greater than
zero but less than 10. It can be enumeratively defined as the class that

contains 2, 4, 6, and 8.
Technically, enumerative definitions are intensional definitions. If you
identify a class by listing its members, you are identifying a property that
they and they alone have. For example, if you identity C as the class
containing 2, 4, 6, and 8, you are identifying C as the class containing all and
only those objects x such that x have the property of being identical with 2 or
4 or 6 or 8. See “intension vs. extension.”
Intension vs. extension: Intensions are to predicates what senses are to
referring terms, and extensions are to predicates what referents are to
referring terms. So if Beethoven’s nine symphonies are Smith’s nine favorite
pieces of music, then “symphony composed by Beethoven” has the same
extension as “one of Smith’s top nine favorite pieces of music,” meaning
that, for any object x, ‹x is one of Smith’s top nine pieces of music› is true iff
‹x is a symphony composed by Beethoven.›
But obviously those sentences have different intensions. After all ‹x is a
symphony composed by Beethoven› entails ‹x is a symphony›, whereas ‹x is
one of Smith’s top nine favorite pieces of music› does not entail that. See
“predicate” and “quasi-quotation marks.”

Interpretation: As it is used in everyday life, an “interpretation” of a given
body of data is a hypothesis as to what is meant by that data. As it used in
philosophy, the word “interpretation” sometimes bears this meaning; but it
sometimes bears a very different one. An “interpretation,” in the distinctly
philosophical sense of the word, is an assignment of meaning to an
expression that contains undefined or only partially defined constituents. (In
what follows, the words “interpretation” and “interpret” (etc.) will be used
only in the second, strictly philosophical sense.)
It is statement-forms, not statements proper, that are interpreted. (A
statement-form is an open-sentence.) The reason is that anything with an
undefined constituent ipso facto fails to say anything true or false. To
interpret an open-sentence is to assign constants to the variables. So one way
to interpret “x is even and y is odd” would be to assign the numbers two and
three to “x” and “y,” respectively. That interpretation of that statement-form
validates it, meaning that the resulting sentence is correct. By assigning three
and two to “x” and “y” respectively, we’ve produced an interpretation of it
that fails to validate it. And by assigning Barack Obama to “x’” and the
property of being the U.S. President in 2009 to “phi,” I’ve produced an
interpretation of “x is phi” that validates it.
Oftentimes, expressions that seem not to contain free variables do. For
example, “Jim is a nice guy” is so vague, that until a specific meaning has
been assigned to “nice,” nothing has really been said. Where expressions of
this sort are concerned, context tends to supply the missing interpretations,
that being why we don’t see “nice” as being a variable, like “phi.” Also, with
“nice,” there is an understood, and quite restricted, range of possible
interpretations, whereas with “phi,” that range is likely to be more open-
ended. Thus, we’re quick to see “phi” for the variable that it is, but not so
quick to do so with “nice.”
“Just in case”: See “iff.”
Leibniz’s Law: “According to Leibniz’s Law, if x and y are numerically
identical, then the one has any property had by the other. So if Ben Franklin
is smart, so is the inventor of bifocals.”
Logical form: The logical form of a sentence S is what is represented by a
sentence S* that makes it clear what S entails and what entails S. Consider
the sentence:

(a) “nothing snores.”
Given its grammar, (a) seems to license the inference that there exists some
strange entity—the nothing, or some such—that snores. But (a) doesn’t
warrant this inference. What (a) means is perspicuously represented by:
(b) “the property of snoring is un-instantiated.”
Unlike (a), (b) isn’t misleading as to what can be inferred from it. But (a) and
(b) encode the very same proposition. Since (a) and (b) satisfy these
conditions, (b) is a representation of (a)’s logical form. If the relationship
borne by a sentence S1 to another sentence S2 parallels that borne by (a) to
(b), S2 gives S1’s logical form. See “entailment” and “meaning vs. entailment-
relations.”[4] See “logically perfect language.”
Logically perfect language: Let L be a language having the following
property. Given any sentence S belonging to L, S’s logical and grammatical
forms coincide. In that case, L is a logically perfect language.
There can be no such language. There could exist such a language only if
a sentence’s entailment-relations could always be read off of its grammatical
surface. This would be possible only if all entailment were formal entailment.
But entailment is not, in general, formal entailment. Formal entailment is
parasitic on informal entailment, and formal analytic truth is parasitic on
informal analytic truth. The reasons for this are given in Chapters 1 and 18.
Main connective: See “connective.”
Materialism: The doctrine that mental entities (e.g., beliefs) are identical
with physical entities (e.g., brain states).
Meanings vs. entailment relations: For two sentences to have the same
meanings, it is necessary that they be equivalent (i.e., that they be such that
the one is true if and only if the other is true). So if P entails something that Q
does not entail, then P and Q don’t have the same meaning. For example:
“Jim is an avid reader” entails that Jim can read, whereas “Jim is a lousy
soccer player” does not entail that. Therefore, those two sentences have
different meanings.
But even though, in order for two sentences to be equivalent, it is
necessary that the one entail any sentence entailed by the other, that isn’t

sufficient for sameness of meaning. For any x, ‹x is a unique even prime› is
equivalent with ‹x is the unique number n such that n = 2 if there is no
completeness proof for arithmetic and n = 3 otherwise.› Neither sentence
entails anything not also entailed by the other. But those sentences obviously
differ in meaning.
For two sentences to have the same meaning, it is necessary, not only that
they entail the same things, but that they do so in the same way. Even though,
for any x, ‹x is a unique even prime› entails the same things as ‹x is the
unique number n such that n = 2 if there is no completeness proof for
arithmetic and n = 3 otherwise›, they entail those same things in different
ways. For example, the way that ‹x is even› is derived from the first is very
simple, whereas the way it is derived from the second is very complex.
Modal operator: A modal operator is an operator (i.e., a device that, when
coupled with a sentence or ordered n-tuple of sentences, yields a new
sentence) that describes the modal status of that proposition, meaning that it
says of that proposition that it is can be true, must be true, can be false, or
must be false. Thus, “it is necessary” is a modal operator, since, when placed
in front of “that 
1 + 1 = 2,” yields:
(i) “it is necessarily the case that 1 + 1 = 2,”
which describes the proposition meant by “1 + 1 = 2” as necessarily true. And
“it is possible” is a modal operator, since, when placed in front of “that Smith
is in France,” yields:
(ii) “it is possible that Smith is in France,”
which describes the proposition meant by “Smith is in France” as potentially
true.
In (i), “that 1 + 1 = 2” is said to be governed by “it is necessarily the case,”
meaning only that it denotes the proposition to which the property of being
necessarily true is being attributed. In (iv), “that law school will be
intolerably boring” is governed by “Laura fears” since it denotes the
proposition to which the property of being feared by Laura is being
attributed.
Anything within an expression governed by an operator is said to fall
within the scope of that operator. In (ii), “France” falls within the scope of “it

is possible.” In (iii), “two” falls within the scope of “Jerry believes that.” See
“operator” and “epistemic operator.”
Model: To “model” a collection of data is to produce a hypothesis that
accounts for it.
Model (second meaning): A model of a set of open-sentences is an
assignment of meanings to the undefined, or partially defined, expressions
occurring in a set of open-sentences. Consider the following open-sentences:
(1) There is nothing that bears R to N.
(2) Anything x bears R to one, and only one, thing y.
(3) If x bears R to y, and y bears R to z, then x bears R to z.
(4) If x bears R to y, y doesn’t bear R to x.
Whether (1)–(3) come out true depends on what we take “N” and “R” to
stand for, and also on what we take “anything” and “nothing” to mean. Do
we mean anything at all? Or do we mean anything falling into some specific
class of objects (e.g., the class of numbers or of aquatic mammals)? The same
question mutatis mutandis arises in connection with “nothing.” (If we take
“anything” to mean “any whole number,” then the universe of discourse is
the class of whole numbers. If we take it to mean “any penguin,” then the
universe of discourse is the class of penguins.)
To answer these questions is to provide an “interpretation” of these
expressions. An “interpretation” of a set of open-sentences is thus an
assignment of definite meanings to the undefined or partially defined
expressions occurring in it. If, given a particular interpretation X (1)–(3)
come out true, X is a “model” of (1)–(3). If, given X, (1)–(3) comes out false,
then X doesn’t model them.
Here’s one interpretation of (1)–(3). Take the universe of discourse to be
the whole numbers (zero, one two, etc.). N is zero, and R is the relation of
being the immediate predecessor of. Relative to this interpretation, (1)–(3)
come out true. This interpretation is therefore a model of (1)–(3).
Here’s a different interpretation of (1)–(3).Take the universe of discourse
to be the class of people. Take N to be Dick Cheney, and take R to be the
relationship that a child bears to either one of its parents. This interpretation
fails to model (1)–(3). There are several reasons for this. Thus, interpreted,
(1) says Dick Cheney isn’t a parent, which is false; (2) says that nobody has

more than one parent, which is false; and (3) says that grandparents are
immediate parents, which is false.
Molecular proposition: A proposition that has another proposition as a
proper part. For example, if grass is green, then something is green is a
molecular proposition, since it has two propositions as proper parts of itself,
namely, grass is green and something is green. Other examples of molecular
propositions are Bob is short and Mary is tall; Mary is smarter but Sally is
smarter than Mary.
Some propositions that are in fact molecular don’t appear to be at first.
For example, John wants to catch a fish is a molecular proposition, since it’s
the same as John wants it to be the case that John catches a fish, and John
catches a fish is a proposition. See “atomic proposition.”
Molecular sentence: A sentence that has another sentence as a proper part
(e.g., “grass is green and snow is white”). Some sentences are molecular that
don’t initially appear to be. For example, “John wants to catch a fish” is
molecular since it’s really an abbreviation for: “John wants it to be the case
that John catches a fish.”
Many of the expressions we’re about to define (e.g., “quantified
generalization”) are used in connection with propositions and with sentences.
Mutatis mutandis: This means provided that the relevant changes are made.
Suppose that you and I have different employers and also that your boss hates
my boss with such vitriol that he will reward anyone who harms my boss in
any way. In that case, the statement: “I’ll get fired if I punch my boss, and
you’ll get fired if you do the very same thing” is false. Supposing that I
punch my boss, your doing the very same thing would consist in your
punching my boss, which wouldn’t get you fired. But if you were to punch
your boss, you would get fired. Thus, the right statement is: “I’ll get fired if I
punch my boss, and you’ll get fired if you do the very same thing mutatis
mutandis.”
Necessary: A proposition is necessary if there is no coherently conceivable
circumstance where it is false. Example of such a proposition: 1 + 1 = 2. See
“contingent,” “possible,” and “proposition.”
Negation: The negation of P is not-P. So the negation of a proposition is the
statement that says that P is false. (Ockham uses the obsolete term

“contradictory opposite” instead of “negation.”)
Necessity, sufficiency: “If P then Q” means that there’s no way that P can be
true unless Q is true. This, in its turn, means that the truth of Q is necessary
for that of P and, also, that the truth of P is sufficient for the truth of Q. See
“entails.”
Necessity, sufficiency (revisited): “P entails Q” means the same thing as “Q
is necessary for P,” which in turn means the same thing as “P is sufficient for
Q.” See “entails.”
Normative proposition: A proposition is normative if it says how things
should be. Killing is wrong is a normative proposition, since it says that
killing shouldn’t occur. See “proposition” and “descriptive proposition.”
Numerically identical: x and y are numerically identical if they are the very
same thing. So Benjamin Franklin is numerically identical with the person
who invented bifocals. If you punch Ben Franklin, you are also punching the
inventor of bifocals and vice versa.
Observable characteristic: Any characteristic of a thing that one can see or
otherwise sense-perceive. One can see that a thing is red. One can feel that a
thing is solid. Thus, redness and solidity are, in at least some instances,
observable characteristics. One cannot see that a thing consists of such and
such micro-particles. Thus, the property of being composed of such things is
not an observable one.
It’s obvious that whether a given characteristic is observable or not is
typically context-dependent. A thing’s being red or solid might be as
theoretical a fact as its consisting of molecules of a certain kind. To creatures
of our intelligence level, but of one-trillionth our size, the fact that my desk is
solid could be known only through elaborate inferences; and its being solid
would not, in that context, be something that could be observed.
Still, the distinction between observable and unobservable characteristics
is a good one. But, when saying that x’s having phi is (un)observable, one
must realize that what one is saying is elliptical for a relational statement of
the form: given the nature of physical relationship to x, x’s having phi is,
with respect to us, an (un)observable fact.
Occurrence: An occurrence of an expression is a token of it. The expression

“snow” occurs three times (i.e., there are three occurrences of it) in the
following sentence: “Jim likes snow and I love snow but Mary hates snow.”
See “expression-token.”
Open-sentences: Consider the sentence “Bill Gates is wealthy.” That
sentence is true. Replace “Bill Gates” with a variable—with an “x.” The
result is ‹x is wealthy›, which is neither true nor false. ‹x is wealthy› is an
“open-sentence.” (The characters flanking that expression are known as
quasi-quotation marks. They may, for the time being, be treated as
quotation-marks.)
In general, an open-sentence is an expression that contains a free variable
and is therefore neither true nor false.
A free variable is one for which no reference is supplied either by the
context or by preceding material. So if, out of the blue, I say ‹x is even›, my
utterance contains a free variable, and is therefore neither true nor false.
A bound variable is a variable that isn’t free. Thus, a bound variable is one
that is assigned a referent by the context or by preceding material. Consider
the sentence:
(LU) “For any human being x, if x isn’t loved by anyone, x isn’t happy.”
LU says that, given a human being, if that human being isn’t loved, then that
same human being isn’t happy. Thus, the italicized part assigns a referent to
the occurrences of the variable (the “x”). The occurrences of “x” in the
underlined part of LU are bound.
An open-sentence isn’t true or false. But replacing the free variables in an
open-sentence may result in a true sentence. If an open-sentence is such that
replacing the variables in it sometimes/always/never results in a true
sentence, that open-sentence is said to be “true for some/all/no values of its
variables.”
Thus, “x is an even number” is true for some values of its variables (since
“two is an even number” is true but “three is an even number is false”); and
“x is identical with x” is true for all values of its variables; and “x is not
identical with x” is false for all values of its variables.
Commentary: Logicians generally say that their discipline studies relations
holding among sentences. This isn’t true. It studies relations holding among
the sentence-schemata. “Grass is green and show is white” entails “snow is
white.” The logician is interested in this fact only to the extent that it alerts

him to the corresponding generalization, viz. for any sentences P and Q, ‹P
and Q› entails ‹P. › But ‹P and Q› and ‹P› are not sentences; they’re open-
sentences; they’re sentence-like entities that contain free variables and, unlike
real sentences, are therefore neither true nor false.
Operator: An “operator” is any expression that, when joined with a sentence,
forms a new sentence. So “it is possible” is an operator, since, when
conjoined with “Smith is in France,” a new sentence is formed, namely “it is
possible that Smith is in France.” And “George believes” is also an operator
for the same reason.
There are many kinds of operators; but two kinds are of special
importance: modal operators and epistemic operators. See “predicates” and
“quasi-quotation marks.”
“Other things being equal”: See “ceteris paribus.”
Perception: See “sense-perception.”
Performative utterance: When, in the context of a marriage ceremony, the
priest says “I now pronounce you man and wife,” the priest is not (so it
would seem, and so we’ll momentarily assume) reporting an existing fact.
(I’ll explain the raison d’être for the hedge in a moment.) He is not affirming
the already existing truth that he is now in the process of forging a marital
bond between the two individuals before him. In uttering those words, he is
creating a fact, not reporting a fact.
A sentence-utterance functioning in this way is known as a “performative”
utterance. Other examples of Performatives are utterances of “I christen this
ship the Mel Gibson,” “I hereby challenge you to a duel,” and “I promise to
pay you back with interest if you loan me the money.”
The concept of a performative was first clearly identified by J.L. Austin in
his (1955) lectures at Harvard, which were published in 1976 under the title
How to do things with Words. Austin’s points are anticipated, albeit
obscurely, by Wittgenstein (1958).
Austin said, very plausibly, that performative utterances are neither true
nor false. In saying “I now pronounce you man and wife,” the priest isn’t
describing an existing fact, and his words are therefore neither true nor false
—or so it would seem.
But in his (2004) book Philosophy in the 20th Century (Volume II), Scott

Soames brilliantly shows that this is false. Consider the statement:
(S) “Supposing for argument’s sake that I now pronounce you man and wife,
it is incumbent on you to love and cherish each other.”
(S) is synonymous with:
(S*) Supposing it true that I now pronounce you man and wife, it follows that
it’s true that it is incumbent on you to love and cherish each other.”
S is meaningful; in fact, it’s correct (or at least could be, given certain
reasonable assumptions about the individuals in question). Let O be the
occurrence in S of “I now pronounce you man and wife.” If O cannot be
meaningfully supposed true, S is meaningless, and therefore neither true nor
false. Bearing this in mind, let O* be some occurrence of “I now pronounce
you man and wife” that is occurring on its own. O and O* obviously have the
same meaning. Since O is capable of being meaningfully supposed true, the
same is true of O*, and Austin is therefore wrong to say otherwise.
An argument similar to the one just given shows that a celebrated contention
of Wittgenstein’s is false. Wittgenstein (1958) said that, when one says “I am
sad”—when, in general, one makes any statements about one’s state of mind
—one isn’t really saying anything. Saying “I am sad,” Wittgenstein says, is
no more a bona fide speech act than is grimacing or moping about. In saying
this, Wittgenstein was trying to undermine the view that sentences report
facts; he was trying to vindicate his provocative—but, when scrutinized,
quite hollow—contention that “words are deeds.” (This contention is one to
which Austin gave some substance in his theory of performative utterances.)
We can use an analogue of Soames’ argument to refute this contention of
Wittgenstein’s. If, as Wittgenstein alleges, a stand-alone occurrence of “I am
sad” is neither true nor false, as it’s merely a glorified frown, then it’s
counterpart in an utterance of
(S#) “if it’s supposed true that I am sad, then I am in a mood that is, in at
least some respects, less than optimal”
is equally meaningless, an immediate corollary being that any utterance of S#
is meaningless. But such an utterance is quite meaningful; in fact, such
utterances are correct.
Also, if you say “I am sad,” you are obviously reporting a fact. That’s why

your utterance could be false—you could be lying after all. Thus, utterances
of “I am sad,” and first-person reports generally, can be meaningful, and
usually are, contrary to what Wittgenstein is alleging.
Personal stratum of cognition: The totality of mental events within one’s
own mind that could in principle fall within the scope of introspective
awareness. Mental events in your mind mediate between sensory input and
cognitive output. You could not become introspectively aware of these. Nor
are you aware of the cognitive events in your own mind that mediate
language-learning and comprehension. So far as you can become aware of
them, it is in the way that you can be aware of sub-atomic particles, and not
in the direct, introspective way in which you are aware of your own
sensations. No amount of psychoanalytic intervention could make you
introspectively aware of them, and they are therefore “deeply” unconscious,
to use Chomsky’s term. But, given psychoanalytic intervention, you could
become introspectively aware of the unconscious events and conditions
posited by Freud. Thus, the Freudian unconscious falls within the scope of
the personal stratum of cognition, as does everything that, without such
intervention, is accessible to introspection. The cognitive processes mediating
language-comprehension, perception, etc., are not done by you, even though
they happen in your mind. There is thus a sense in which they are impersonal
(or subpersonal). They constitute a framework underlying the events
constitutive of the personal stratum of cognition and, for that reason, are
accessible to it.
So far as I know, Chomsky (1959) deserves credit for being the first to
delineate the concept of subpersonal thought, and also for being the first to
put the concept of subpersonal mentation to scientific use. In doing the
former, he opened up new vistas, not just in psychology, but in epistemology
and philosophy generally. There are allusions to the subpersonal in Chapter
VII of Freuds (1901) work The Interpretation of Dreams. The main
contention of Kant’s (1789) work, The Critique of Pure Reason, presupposes
its existence. Perception and thought, Kant contends, result from a
convergence of (i) disturbances of our sensory surfaces and (ii) concepts that
are hardwired into us and constitute our innate cognitive endowment. Kant
makes it very clear that it is not until after these concepts have processed
these disturbances that there occurs any mental activity that could be
attributed to a person. So Kant clearly believes that personal mental activity

presupposes the existence of pre-personal—or, as we might also put it,
subpersonal—mental activity. Chomsky often cites Kant as one of his
forbears.
Perspicuous/perspicuity: A sentence is “perspicuous” if it is clear in the
sense that its inferential structure (what it entails and what entails it) can be
read off of its grammatical structure. A perspicuous, set-theoretic translation
of “2 + 2 = 4” would be totally unclear to most people, even though “2 + 2 =
4” is very clear (in the psychological sense). That’s why “clear” and
“perspicuous” aren’t interchangeable. Perspicuity is a logical property; clarity
is a psychological property. Perspicuity is to some extent a contextual notion.
Depending on what one’s background assumptions are, one sentence may or
may not be more perspicuous than some other synonymous sentence. But,
other things being equal, the more syntactic structure a sentence has, the
more perspicuous it is. The reasons for this are given in Chapter 18, Section
4.1.)
Possible: A proposition is possible if there is some coherently conceivable
circumstance where it is true. Example of such a proposition: Mary owns a
BMW. See “contingent,” “necessary,” and “proposition.”
Predicate: In the sentence, “Smith is tall,” the predicate is “tall.” A
“predicate” is generally said to be an expression that refers to a property. But
this isn’t a good definition. The expression “the property of being tall” is not
a predicate; it’s actually a singular term. But “tall” is a predicate. So is
“smart.”
In general, a predicate is an expression that, when joined in a
grammatically acceptable manner with a singular term, yields a sentence that
attributes a property to the individual referred to by that term. “Smart” is a
predicate because, when joined (in a grammatically acceptable way) with
“Sally,” the result is a sentence that attributes smartness to Sally, viz. “Sally
is smart.”
Predicates may be identified with open-sentences. See “intensions vs.
extensions” and “open-sentences.”
Primitive expression: Synonymous with “semantically simple expression.” A
primitive expression is one that doesn’t consist of other expressions.
Examples of such expressions are “red” or “sweet.”

Occurrences of primitive expressions are not as easy to identify as one
might think. Let T be an utterance of “snow is white.” One would think that,
in T, the occurrence of “snow” is semantically simple.
Chomsky would say that it contains a phonetically unrealized case-marker.
Chomsky’s reasons for taking this view are extremely compelling. See
Chomsky (1965, 1998).
Probability: This word is “ambiguous.” It has (at least) two meanings. First,
there is the statistical meaning of “probability.” If there are 10 balls in the
urn, only one of which is white, the statement “x is a white ball in the urn”
has a statistical probability of 1/10.
Then there is explanatory probability. P makes Q probable in the
explanatory sense if, given what it is that is already believed, there are more
causal anomalies if P is true and Q is false than there are if, other things being
equal, P is true and Q is true.
It is argued in Chapter 11 that explanatory probability cannot be reduced
to, or understood in terms of, statistical probability.
Property: A property is a characteristic. Other words for “property” are
“attribute” and “feature.” This is the same as saying that a property is
anything of which there can be instances. Put another way, a property is
anything that can be had—“had” in the sense in which one has a
characteristic, not in the sense in which one has a car. So the “had” in
question is that of attribution, not of possession. A property is anything that
can be meaningfully attributed to something.
Commentary: some exotic properties: Consider the number two. There are
instances of this property. Any pair of objects is such an instance. The
number two can thus be thought of as a property had by all pairs of objects
and by nothing else.
Anything of which there are instances is a property. (But there are some
properties of which there are no instances; e.g., the property of being a
perfectly moral human. But that property is composed entirely of things of
which there are instances. So it’s possible—though I haven’t personally
verified it—that every property either has instances or is composed of
properties that have instances. Question: are there properties that
counterexample this conjecture?)
The numeral “2”—that is, the sign for the number two—is also a

universal. But it’s distinct from the number two itself. The numeral “2” is, for
reasons that we discussed a little while ago, a property of certain ink marks
and bursts of sounds. (Those ink marks, etc., are tokens of that numeral.) But
the number two is a property of pairs of objects. “2” is no more identical with
the number two than the name “John-Michael” is identical with the person
John-Michael.
Works of music are properties. Instances of those properties are what we
refer to as “performances.” Consider the first movement of Beethoven’s
“Moonlight Sonata.” I played it a few minutes ago. But that work of music
didn’t cease to exist when I stopped performing it. Of course, it’s likely that
other people are performing it. But it wouldn’t cease to exist if, for a 10-
minute period, nobody were to perform it. The “Moonlight Sonata” isn’t
identical with any particular stream of sound. Therefore, it isn’t identical
with any stream of sound at all. The “Moonlight Sonata” is a property of
certain streams of sound—of streams of sound that have certain melodic and
harmonic properties. When somebody plays that Sonata on the piano, that
person is producing a stream of sound that has the right properties and is
therefore an instance—or, as we would usually say, a performance—of that
sonata. (Other works of art, e.g., paintings, appear to be concrete objects. The
Mona Lisa is a concrete object; it could be destroyed. Works of visual art
seem, in general, to be spatiotemporal and thus to be property-instances, as
opposed to properties. Whether works of literature are properties or property-
instances is a delicate question that will be set aside.)
Propositions: The things that are meant by true or false utterances or
inscriptions.
Commentary: Propositions aren’t sentences; propositions are sentence-
meanings, not sentences per se.
Propositions are not spatiotemporal. The proposition snow is white does
not have a location in space or time, even though particular instances of
white snow obviously do have such a location.
Propositions are not psychological entities; they are mind-independent
entities.
Believing a proposition is something mental; but the thing believed is not.
More generally, grasping a proposition is something mental; but the thing
grasped is not.
Let’s suppose that:

(1) “Smith believes that the inventor of bifocals is 6-feet tall’
is true.
What is the object of Smith’s belief? What is the thing believed in—the
thing that, in having that belief, he believes to be true?
It’s tempting to say that it’s something mental—that it’s some mental
event or psychological condition. But this is wrong. Smith’s having that
belief is indeed a psychological condition. But the thing believed is not. The
believing is mental; the believed is not. In other words, the thing that, by
virtue of having that belief, Smith regards as true isn’t a mental or
psychological event or condition (or whatnot) at all. Here’s why.
Whatever it is, that thing is something that others grasp. (And, what
follows, it is also something people besides Smith could grasp, even if they
don’t.) Those who agree with Smith (about the height of the inventor of
bifocals) believe it true; those who disagree believe it false. But they all grasp
that thing.
Supposing that any given one of those people were to perish, and that all
his or her mental contents were therefore to vanish, these other people could
(and probably would) continue to grasp that thing; they could continue to
believe it true or false or probable or whatnot. If Smith and I both believe that
the inventor of bifocals is 6-feet tall, Smith’s dying won’t prevent me from
continuing to believe it or, therefore, from continuing to be able to believe it.
Smith’s death, though tragic, is irrelevant.
By the same logic, appropriately generalized, given any two people who
believe or otherwise grasp any proposition, the existence of the one person’s
mind and mental states is independent of the other person’s believing (or
otherwise grasping) that proposition. Any one person’s mental states and
events can cease to exist without in any way jeopardizing anyone’s ability to
believe or disbelieve that the inventor of bifocals is 6-feet tall.
Thus, the thing that Smith believes—the object of his belief—is something
that continues to exist even if any given person’s mental events and
conditions cease to exist. Therefore, that thing isn’t identical with anyone’s
mental states or, needless to say, with anyone’s mind in its entirety. Nor is it
identical with any thing’s mental states. Supposing that non-humans—
animals orMartians or whatever—have beliefs concerning the height of the
inventor of bifocals, everything we just said holds of those beliefs. Since that
thing isn’t identical with the mind or mental states of any entity, it can’t be

identical with any mental entity. To deny this would be to affirm the
absurdity that there is a mental thing which isn’t any particular mental thing.
What, more exactly, is the nature of this thing? What, in general, are
propositions? (In other words, what is the nature of the things that are the
objects of belief and disbelief? We don’t have to worry about that right now;
it’s irrelevant to what we’re about to say. But it is thoroughly answered in
Chapter 3.)
Additional commentary: Propositions have the distinctive and crucially
important property of being non-derivatively true or false. What does this
mean? Propositions are obviously true or false. (It’s true that Finland is in
Europe; it’s false that it’s an island in the Pacific Ocean.)
To be sure, things other than propositions are true or false (e.g., sentences
and beliefs). The sentence “Finland is in Europe” is true. But that sentence is
true only by virtue of its association with the corresponding proposition. That
sentence is true only because it expresses a true proposition. So it’s really the
proposition that deserves to be described, without qualification, as “true”; and
when we say of the sentence that it’s “true,” we’re using the word “true” to
pick out a related, but distinct, property; we’re using it to pick out the
property of encoding something that’s true.
And these, it must be stressed, are very different properties. It’s one thing
to have the property of being true. (The proposition Finland is in Europe has
that property. It’s quite another to have the property of encoding something
true.) The sentence “Finland is in Europe” has that property. But the
corresponding proposition does not have it, since propositions, unlike
sentences, don’t encode anything.
What we just said about sentences is true of beliefs. My belief that
Finland’s in Europe is “true.” But it’s true only because of its association
with a true proposition. In other words, it’s “true” in the sense that it has for
its content something that is true. Put another way, the thing which that belief
is a belief in is true, and the belief is “true” only in the second-class sense that
it has this association with this other thing—this other being something that,
unlike the sentence, is true in a first-class, non-derivative sense.
Propositions are thus “non-derivatively true,” whereas beliefs and
sentences are “derivatively true.” For this reason, propositions are sometimes
defined as “non-derivative bearers of truth and falsity.”
We thus have three different definitions of “proposition”: (i) thing meant
by a sentence; (ii) thing towards which one can have an attitude (e.g., belief,

disbelief, fear, hope); (iii) non-derivative bearer of truth or falsity. While no
one of these definitions is 100% accurate each is accurate to a high degree of
approximation; and while no two of them are precisely equivalent (i.e., while
no two of them pick out precisely the same class of entities), any two of them
are almost equivalent (i.e., the classes picked out by any two of them overlap
to a very high degree).
Propositional attitudes: Propositions are the things we affirm. They are also
the things towards which belief, doubt, fear, and all other attitudes are
directed. One can’t just believe; one must believe that snow is white or that
grass is green. One can’t just fear; one must fear that Mary will come home
before tomorrow, or some such.
We’ll see in a moment that there are things other than propositions that we
believe, doubt, etc. But, though it’s therefore not entirely accurate to say that
propositions are the things we believe, doubt, etc., it’s a good point of
departure; and, for the time being, we’ll assume it’s truth.
In believing that Sally will come home tomorrow, one has a certain
propositional attitude. In fearing it, one has a different propositional attitude.
The proposition is the same, but the attitude has changed. In wondering
whether Sally will come home, one has yet another attitude towards that same
proposition. Belief, doubt, wonder, etc., are thus “propositional attitudes.”
Knowing what is going on in somebody’s mind consists largely, though by
no means entirely, in knowing what that person’s propositional attitudes are.
And to know this, one must know which propositions are the objects of that
person’s mentation; and one must also know, for any given one of those
propositions, which attitude that person has towards it. To know what is
going in Larry’s mind, it isn’t enough to know that the object of his thoughts
is the proposition Sally will come tomorrow; one must also know what sort of
attitude he has towards that proposition. Does he believe it? Hope that it’s
true? Fear that it’s true? And one must have comparable knowledge of every
other proposition that is the object of Larry’s thought. If one doesn’t have
such knowledge, one is ignorant of an extremely important dimension of
Larry’s existence; and if one does have it, one knows much about Larry—but
not everything.
Why not everything? Because not everything mental is a propositional
attitude. Nothing that isn’t content-bearing is a propositional attitude. (To say
of something mental that it’s “content-bearing” is to say that it bears some

kind of message. So my current visual perception is content-bearing, since it
tells me that there’s a computer screen in front of me. My headache isn’t
content-bearing, since it doesn’t bear any message; it’s merely felt.) And
many mental entities that are content-bearing aren’t propositional attitudes,
the reason being that not all contents are propositions. See “propositions.”
Qua: Synonym of “in virtue of.” Larry eats a fish. He’s allergic to all food-
products that contain protein X. This particular fish (though not others)
contains X. So Larry falls ill. Jerry eats a fish; he isn’t allergic to fish, but the
fish he eats is rotten. So he falls ill. What made Larry sick wasn’t his eating a
fish; it was his eating something that had X in it. That thing happened to be a
fish, but that wasn’t what was operative. Thus, it wasn’t in virtue of his eating
a fish, but in virtue of his eating something containing X, that Larry became
sick. Put another way, it was his eating a fish qua thing that contained X, not
a fish qua fish, that made Larry sick. Similarly, it was Jerry’s eating a fish
qua rotten thing, not a fish qua fish, that made him sick.
Qualitatively identical: x and y are qualitatively identical if they resemble
each other to a maximally high degree but may nonetheless be distinct
individuals. So if you have an identical twin—a twin who looks, thinks, talks,
acts (and so on) just like you—then you are qualitatively identical with that
person. But you are not numerically identical with that person, since you are
not literally the very same individual as that other person.
Quantified generalization: Any sentence or proposition that says of some
property how many instances it has. Thus, nothing snores is a quantified
generalization since it says of the property of being a snorer that it has no
instances. For the same reason mutatis mutandis, each of the following is a
quantified generalization: everything snores, something snores, three things
snore, and most things snore. See “quantifier.”
Quantifier: An expression that, when coupled with a predicate yields a
sentence saying how many things of a given kind have that property. A
predicate may roughly be said to be an expression denoting a property (e.g.,
“snore,” “is tall”). (Why only roughly? See below.) “All people” is a
quantifier, since, when coupled with “snore,” which denotes the property of
snoring, yields “all people snore,” which says how many things of a certain
kind have the property of snoring. “No fish” is a quantifier since, given the

expression snore, yields the sentence “no fish read Shakespeare,” which says
how many things of a given kind have the property of reading Shakespeare.
In logic and the philosophy of language, one often uses artificial analogues
of expressions like “all,” “some,” “none,” etc. In logic, the sentence “all
people snore” is represented as “for any x, if x is a person, then x snores.”
And “some people snore” becomes “for some x, x is a person and x snores.”
The reason why artificial quantifiers (e.g., “for any x,” “for some x”) are used
in lieu of their natural-language counterparts (“all,” “some”) is that, for the
reasons discussed in the previous chapter, the logical form of quantified
statements is concealed unless these replacements are made. For example,
“no person snores” has the same grammatical form as “John snores,” which
misleadingly suggests that, like the latter, the former attributes the property of
snoring to some entity. But “nothing snores” does not do that; that’s the very
opposite of what it does. What “no person snores” says is this: “for any x, if x
is a person, then x does not snore.” The latter sentence clearly doesn’t
attribute the property of snoring to anyone or anything, and is, in this respect,
more perspicuous than its natural language counterpart.
The reason it’s only roughly correct to say that “predicates” denote
properties is that “the property of snoring” and “the property of being tall”
clearly pick out properties—but they aren’t predicates. See “predicate.”
Commentary: All quantifiers are considered to be connectives. Thus “for all
x,” “for no x,” etc. are connectives. Here is a very rough explanation of the
rationale for this practice. Consider the sentence “all people snore.” This can
be thought of as saying that each possible sentence of the form “x snores,”
where x is some person, is true. So it can be thought of as saying that “John
snores,” “Sally snores,” are all true. Thus, “for all x,” can be thought of as an
expression that, when given “Sally snores,” “John snores,” etc., as inputs,
yields another sentence, viz. “it is true that John snores, Sally snores [etc.].” I
must point out that this explanation is very approximate. But the
technicalities that would have to be gone through to make it completely
accurate are not, at this stage, very important.
Given that all quantifiers are connectives, it follows that all quantified
generalizations are considered to be molecular propositions. See “quantified
generalization.”
Quasi-quotation marks: In logic and the philosophy of language we often
wish to talk about whole classes of sentences having a given form. We might

wish to say, for example, that all sentences of the same form as “grass is
green or it is not the case that grass is green” are true, that all sentences of the
same form as “grass is green and it is not the case that grass is green” are
false, that all things have the property of being self-identical, that no thing
has the property of a being a square circle.
But it’s hard to do this without producing a nonsense-statement. Consider
the following statement:
(1) For any proposition P, the expression “P or not-P” is true.
(1) seems okay at first. But it isn’t. It’s false. This is because “P or not-P”
isn’t a sentence. If, out of the blue, I say to you “x is larger than four,” I
haven’t said anything, since “x” is a variable, not a numeral. (If I don’t say it
out of the blue, and it’s understood that “x” has a certain referent, then it may
be true.) Similarly, so “P or not-P” is no meaningful statement can contain a
free variable. If I say to you, “P or not-P,” I haven’t said anything, the reason
being that “P” is a variable. “P or not-P” isn’t true or false, and it’s no more
capable of being true or false than an out-of-the-blue utterance of “x is larger
four.” Given that “P or not-P” is never true, it follows that (1) is false. After
all, (1) says that “P or not-P” is always true—when, in fact, it’s never true (or
false).
But what (1) is meant to express, even though it fails to do so, is that,
given the expression “P or not-P,” the result of replacing both occurrences of
“P” with a true or false sentence is itself a truth. (For example, if we replace
those occurrences with “snow is white,” the result is “either snow is white or
it is not the case that snow is white,” which is true.)
The sentence:
(2) For any proposition P, the expression ‹P or not-P› is true
is an abbreviation for
(2) Given the expression “P or not-P,” the result of replacing both
occurrences of “P” with a true or false sentences is itself a truth.
(1) is often abbreviated into:
(3) For any P, ‹P or not-P› is true,
which, in its turn, is often abbreviated into:

(4) P or not-P.
The strange rectangular expressions in (3) are known as “quasi-quotation
marks.” Putting quasi-quotation marks around an expression results in an
expression that refers to everything in the original expression besides the
variables. So ‹if x is larger than y and y is larger than z, then x is larger than
z› is an expression that refers to everything in the expression in between the
quasi-quotation marks besides the occurrences of “x,” “y,” and “z.” Quasi-
quotation marks are the invention of Willard van Orman Quine (1941).
Quasi-quotation marks are extremely useful. Without them, or some other
comparable device, we couldn’t express the truth expressed by the sentence:
(4) For all values of x, y, and z, the sentence ‹if x is larger than y and y is
larger than z, then x is larger than z› is true.

Quasi-quotes, though seldom overtly present in discourse, are very often
implicitly so. I’ve shown elsewhere that, without them, it isn’t possible to
make what is meant by expressions that have “discourse-internal
referents,”—for example, the occurrences of “that person” in the sentence: “if
a person is mean to everyone, that person will have no friends and that person
will therefore be unhappy.”
Some more illustrations: The sentence:
(5) For any individual x, the expression “x is identical with x” is true,
is false. This is because “x is identical with x” is no more true or false than an
out-of-the-blue utterance of “x is even.” What is true is the statement that:
(6) A true sentence results if the occurrences of “x” in “x is identical with x”
are replaced with an expression, the same one in both cases, of an expression
that picks out some object.
The standard way of abbreviating (5) is:
(7) For any x, ‹x is identical with› is true.
Quasi-quotes will occur frequently in the chapters on the philosophy of
language. It’s not always easy to know when they occur; and I often lapse,
using quotation marks instead of them, or just omitting them. When I do this,
mentally insert them—otherwise what I’m saying will be false. (I appreciate
it.) See “quotation marks.”
Quotation marks: The word “snow” has four letters. But snow doesn’t have
four letters. So the sentence “snow has four letters” is false. Snow is white,
crystalline substance, which consists, not of letter, but of H2O molecules. In
the philosophy of language, we often wish to refer to expressions themselves
—we often wish to talk, not about snow (the substance), but “snow” (the
word that substance).We do this by putting quotation marks around the
expression to which we refer. So “snow” refers to the word that refers to the
substance. See “quasi-quotation marks.”
Rationalism: The doctrine that not all knowledge is derived from sense-
perception, the reason being that some knowledge is acquired through the
analysis of concepts. Rationalists typically hold that knowledge is a
prerequisite for our acquiring sensory information and also for our making

any inferences from it. Since such knowledge couldn’t possibly be
observation based, it must have some other basis, this other basis being “pure
reason.” Rationalists hold that knowledge of logical norms is non-perceptual,
their argument being that sense-perception apprises us of what is, not of what
ought to be (even in a narrowly logical sense). See “empiricism.”
Reductio ad absurdum: An argument that proves its point by showing that
the negation of that point, if assumed true, leads to a contradiction (a
statement of the form Q and not-Q). Suppose that P is true, that you know
this, and wish to prove it to a friend of yours who doubts it. One way of doing
so is to assume the negation of P and then show that has a self-contradictory
result. Your position is that there are no even primes greater than two. The
negation of your position is that there are even primes greater than two. You
apprise your friend of your viewpoint. He disagrees. You respond by saying:
“Let’s suppose you’re right. In that case, there is some number n that is
greater than two and is even and is prime. Being prime, n is divisible only by
itself and one. Being greater than two, n ≠ 2. And being even, n is divisible
by two. Thus, n is divisible by itself and one and by two. Therefore it isn’t
divisible only by itself and one. So n both is, and is not, divisible only by
itself and one. You’ve reduced your friend’s position to absurdity.
Refer: The word “refer” is ambiguous. It may refer to a property of actions or
to a property of expressions. (In the present work, it is almost always used to
denote a property of expressions.)
In an utterance of the sentence “when I was discussing the difference
between real virtue and feigned virtue, I was referring to your father,” the
occurrence of the word “referring” picks out a characteristic of a certain
speech act. Given some object O, a given act A that is performed by so and
so is a case of so and so’s referring to O if, in performing A, it was so and
so’s intention to make a statement about O. Let’s refer to this sort of
reference as “reference*.”
In the sentence, “the name ‘Socrates’ refers to a certain philosopher,” the
occurrence of the word “refers” picks out a property of expressions, not of
actions. To say that an expression E refers to some object O is to say that, in
virtue of containing E, a sentence ipso facto concerns O. “Socrates” refers to
Socrates because, in virtue of having the form “...Socrates...,” a sentence says
that Socrates has...x...(“Socrates is tall” says that Socrates has the property of
being a thing x such that x is tall. “Plato admires Socrates” says that Socrates

has the property of being a thing x such that Plato admires x.) Let us refer to
this sort of reference as “reference#.”
Some authors[5] have tried to show that reference# was identical with
reference* or, at the very least, capable of being understood in terms of it.
This is radically absurd.[6] Reference* presupposes reference#. Nobody could
refer* to anything unless there were already meaningful expressions and,
therefore, referring# terms. In Chapter 4, Sections 5.3.2–5.3.4, it is explained
why this is so. (So far as I know, it was John Searle, in his classic (1966)
work Speech Acts, who made this important point for the first time in print.)
Referent: the reference of an expression is what it refers to. See “refer.”
Scope: See “modal operator.”
Second-order desire: A desire about a desire (e.g., a desire to refrain from
acting on one’s desire to have a cigarette).
Self-contradictoriness: Any statement that has the form ‹P and not-P› or that
implies a statement of that form is self-contradictory. All self-contradictory
statements are false. Anything that entails a self-contradictory statement is
false.
Semantic externalism: The doctrine that what our words and sentences mean
isn’t determined wholly by what our thoughts are, but also by environmental
factors of which we may be unaware.
Semantic rule: A rule that assigns meaning to an expression. It’s a semantic
rule of English that “snow” refers to a certain crystalline white substance, and
“water” refers to H2O, etc.
At least some semantic rules assign meaning to expression-types, on the
basis of which tokens of those types have this or that meaning depending on
the circumstances. Thus, the meaning of the word-type “I” doesn’t assign this
or that individual to it. “I” per se doesn’t refer to you or me or anyone else.
But “I” does have a meaning. That meaning is a rule to the effect that tokens
of it refer to the people who produced those tokens. See “expression-type.”
Sentential force: Some sentences are true or false (e.g., “snow is white”). But
some are neither true nor false. Imperatives (i.e., orders—e.g., “get out of
here”) and interrogatives (i.e., questions—e.g., “what’s a hypotenuse?) are

neither true nor false. True or false sentences are known as indicatives, and
they therefore differ in respect of force from both interrogatives and
imperatives.
Sense vs. reference: “The inventor of bifocals” refers to Benjamin Franklin,
and so does “the first postmaster general.” But, even though those
expressions co-refer, they have different senses. Although Benjamin Franklin
was the first postmaster general, it isn’t in virtue of his having this property
that “the inventor of bifocals” refers to him. And although Benjamin Franklin
was the inventor of bifocals, it isn’t in virtue of his having this property that
“the first postmaster general” refers to him. It is in virtue of his being a
unique first postmaster general and a unique inventor of bifocals that
Benjamin Franklin is the referent of, respectively, “the first postmaster
general” and “the inventor of bifocals.” The sense of an expression is the
property that an object must have to be its referent. So supposing that O is the
referent of some expression R, and that it is in virtue of O’s having property
P that R refers to O, P is the “sense” of R.
Commentary: Those who hold that definite descriptions are quantifiers, as
opposed to referring terms, will reject what was just said. See Chapter 6. See
“definite descriptions” and “quantifier.”
Sense-perception: Sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell, and one’s bodily
kinesthetic sense (the feeling of resistance one experiences when trying to
move objects—this sensory modality involves touch but isn’t identical with
it). The two distinguishing features of sense-perception are (i) that it yields
knowledge that is (at the personal level of cognition) non-inferential, and (ii)
perceptual information varies in real-time with the states of affairs it
concerns. See “personal stratum of cognition.”
Sets and classes: A class is simply a collection of some kind—for example,
the class of numbers, the class of even numbers, the class of people, the class
of people who are taking philosophy 101 this semester, the class of smart
people, the class of talented athletes.
The word “set” is sometimes used instead of “class.” We’ll use these
terms interchangeably. (Some set-theorists, e.g., Quine (1956), do not do so.)
Commentary: The sets that are of intellectual interest are usually ones whose
members have some property in common with one another that nothing else

has in common with any of them. So, for example, we talk about the set of
whole numbers, the set of people who have survived pancreatic cancer, the
set of people who are currently philosophy professors. Let S1, S2, and S3 be
these three sets. Every member of S1 has the property of being a whole
number and nothing that isn’t a member of S1 has that property. Thus, the
property of being a whole number generates S1. The property of being a
survivor of pancreatic cancer and the property of being a philosophy
professor generate S2 and S3, respectively.
Technically, given any set, there is some property that all and only its
members have in common. But oftentimes these properties are very
contrived. Let S be the set consisting of Smith and the number two.
Everything in S has the property of being identical either with Smith or with
the number, and nothing outside of that set has that property. But, of course,
we’re usually interested in sets that are generated by explanatorily more
robust properties (e.g., the property of being a number).
Additional commentary: Sets ≠ properties: Some have held that sets are with
properties. Their argument: “Smith is a person” (i.e., “Smith has the property
of being a person”) is equivalent with “Smith is a member of the class of
people,” and the same thing mutatis mutandis holds of any statement that
attributes any property to anything.
But sets are not properties, and it’s easy to identify the fallacy in the
foregoing argument. “Smith is a person” is not equivalent “Smith is a
member of the class of people.” Let S be the class of people currently alive,
and suppose that both Smith and Jones are members of S. Remember that sets
are individuated by their memberships. Thus, S couldn’t possibly exist unless
Jones did as well. But Smith could exist and be a person in a world where
Brown and, therefore, S failed to exist. So “Smith is a person” is not
equivalent with “Smith is a member of S.”
Sets are modally and temporally frozen. Properties are modally and
temporally elastic. A given property may have different instances at different
times and in different universes. (Some properties are modally frozen—e.g.,
the property of being an even number. But such properties are not
representative of properties in general, and we may disregard them in what
follows.) Thus, for any property phi (with the parenthetically noted
exceptions) and any set S, ‹x has phi› is not equivalent with ‹x is a member of
S.›

Simpliciter: This means without qualification. “There is no such thing as
motion simpliciter—one must be moving relative to this or that framework.”
Singular term: Any terms refers to an individual (e.g. “Socrates,” “Shamu”).
See “referring term.”
Slingshot-style arguments: Consider the following sentences:
(1) Mozart was a composer.
(2) The class of all things x such that Mozart was a composer and x is
self-identical is identical with the class of all things x such that x is self-
identical.
(3) The class of all things x such that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in
1997 and x is self-identical is identical with the class of all things x such
that x is self-identical.
(4) Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997.
Here is the position of those who believe in the cogency of slingshot-style
arguments:
(SS[7]) (1) is logically equivalent with (2). Therefore, (1) and (2) must
co-refer, supposing that either refers to anything. (It is being assumed,
very reasonably, that logically equivalent expressions cannot have
different referents.)
(3) is what results when a referring term in (2) is replaced with a co-
referring term. (“The class of all things x such that Mozart was a
composer and x is self-identical” refers to the class of all self-identical
objects, and so too does “the class of all things x such that Bill Clinton
was U.S. President in 1997 and x is self-identical.”) Since
intersubstituting co-referring terms preserves reference, it follows that
(2) and (3) co-refer, supposing that either refers to anything.
(3) is equivalent with (4). Therefore, (3) and (4) must co-refer,
supposing that either refers to anything.
Therefore, (1) and (4) must co-refer, supposing that they refer to
anything.
If the occurrences in (1)–(4) “Mozart was a composer” and “Bill
Clinton was U.S. President in 1997” are replaced with occurrences of
any two true sentences, the argument that results is cogent. Thus, any

two true sentences co-refer, supposing that any true sentence refers to
anything. (For the same reason mutatis mutandis, any two false
sentences co-refer, supposing that any false sentence refers to
anything.)
The property of being true is the one semantically significant thing
that (1) and (4) have in common. So, supposing that sentences refer to
anything, (1) and (4) must refer to the property of being true, and true
sentences must in general be assumed to refer to the property of being
true.[8] (For the same reason mutatis mutandis, false sentences must
refer to the property of being false.[9])
In general, a slingshot-style argument is one to the effect that, since
logically equivalent expressions can’t have different referents and since
intersubstituting co-referring terms preserves truth-value, some class that
would seem to comprise several objects (for example, the class of things that
are referred by true sentences) in fact only comprises one object (for
example, the property of being true).
SS is a poor argument that embodies a spurious understanding of
reference, the same being true of every other slingshot-style argument.
Suppose for argument’s sake that “the class of all things x such that Mozart
was a composer x is self-identical” is functioning as a device of reference. In
that case, it’s picking out the class of self-identical objects, and what (2) is
saying about it is that it’s identical with itself; in other words, (2), thus
interpreted, is saying that:
(2*) the class of self-identical objects is identical with the class of self-
identical objects.
But (2*) is not equivalent with (1). Therefore, if the definite descriptions in
(1) and (2) are assumed to be referring terms—which is precisely what they
are being assumed to be—(2) isn’t equivalent with (1). For the same reason
mutatis mutandis, (4) is not equivalent with (3) if “the class of all things x
such that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997 and x is self-identical” is
taken to be a device of reference.
In order for (2) to be equivalent with (1), the former must be taken to say
that:
(2#) there exists a class to which a thing belongs iff Mozart is a composer and

that thing is self-identical; and there exists a class to which a thing belongs iff
that thing is self-identical; and the first class is identical with the second
class.
But if (2) is interpreted in this way, the definite description occurring in it is a
quantifier, not a referring term. In which case, (3) is not what result when a
referring term is replaced with a co-referring term. (It’s what results when a
non-referring term is replaced with a non-referring term.)
So SS is a failure.
Also, it’s obvious that “snow is white” doesn’t co-refer with “the property
of being true” (or with “the True”). In virtue of having the form, “...the
property of being true...” a sentence is about the property of being true.
(“Everything Bill says has the property of being true” says of the property of
being true that it is instantiated by everything that Bill says.) But in virtue of
having the form “...snow is white...” a sentence is about the proposition that
snow is white. (“If snow is white, then snow isn’t green” says that the
proposition that snow is white, if true, has the proposition that snow isn’t
green as a consequence. Of course, “if snow is white, then snow isn’t green”
can, like any other sentence, be interpreted as concerning the property of
being true—it can be interpreted as saying that the property of being true is a
characteristic of the proposition that snow isn’t green if it’s white. But it isn’t
in virtue of it’s containing an occurrence of “snow is white” that “if snow is
white, then snow isn’t green” concerns that property.) So unless the concept
of reference is warped beyond all recognition—unless the term “reference” is
redefined to as to validate this argument—what SS establishes, supposing its
premises true, is false. In any case, we’ve seen independently of this that not
all of it’s premises are true.
But Donald Davidson took it for granted that SS is cogent.[10] And he
argued that, given the (alleged) fact that SS is cogent, it follows that there is
only one fact. His argument is simple. Put the expression “the fact that” in
front of each of (1)–(4). The same principles that show that (1) and (4) must
co-refer also shows that “the fact that Mozart was a composer” co-refers with
“the fact that Bill Clinton was U.S. President in 1997).”
Davidson concluded, absurdly, that these two facts are identical—and
that, in general, there is only one fact. Having, in his mind, established that
there is only one fact, he argued that mental states are not representations.
Since there is only one fact, Davidson argued, no two mental states represent

different facts. On this basis, Davidson concluded that differences between
mental states—between, for example, my perception of the piano in my
living room and your perception of the ink-marks in front of you—are not
representational differences. Why is this? Because, says Davidson,
representations, supposing them to exist, are representations of facts; and, as
we’ve just seen, there is only one fact. Therefore, Davidson concludes, my
perception of the piano in my living room is representationally just like your
perception of these ink-marks. Thus, the differences between those
perceptions have nothing to do with any representational differences that
there might be between them. Which means that, if there are any such
differences, they are innocuous. Which, in its turn, means that either (i) that
neither perception represents anything or (ii) that, if either perception does
represent something, it is irrelevant to how that perception differs from other
perceptions (or mental states of other kinds) and, therefore, to how what
perception is. Which, give or take some unimportant nuances, means that
neither represents anything.
Davidson’s position (that no mental entity represents anything) is
obviously false, and his argument for it fails for the same reason that SS fails.
But Davidson’s argument involves a blunder of which SS is innocent. For a
mental state to be representational is not for there to be some fact that it
represents. It is for that mental state to be to the effect that there exists some
fact. Suppose that I hallucinate that there is a pink elephant in my living
room. (Assume that, in actuality, there is no such elephant.) My hallucination
is representational. It isn’t like a rock. But there is no elephant x such that my
hallucination represents some pink elephant x such that x is in my living
room. My hallucination is representational in the sense that it is to the effect
that that there exists some pink elephant x such that x is in my living room.
(See Chapter 1, Section 3.2 for further clarification.)
In his (ironically named) book Facing the Facts[11], Stephen Neale puts
forth what he believes to be an improvement on SS.[12] Neale’s argument
involves the following four assumptions:
G1: The sentence “Fa” stands for the same fact as the sentence “a=the unique
thing x such that (x = a and Fx).” (In this context, “=” is to be taken to mean
“is identical with.”)
G2: Any sentence can be put into subject-predicate form.

G3: What a complex expression refers to is a function of what it’s parts refer
to.
G4: Definite descriptions are referring terms. “The even prime” is an
expression that picks out the number two.
Assume that for some individuals a and b, and some properties G and F,
the following are true: “Fa,” “Gb,” and “a ≠ b”; and suppose that these
sentences stand for facts F1, F2, and F3, respectively.
Consider the following seven sentences.
1. Fa. By assumption.
2. a ≠ b. By assumption.
3. Gb. By assumption.
4. a = the unique thing x such that (x = a and Fx). Follows from 1, by G1.
5. a = the unique thing x such that (x = a and x ≠ b). Follows from 2, by G2.
6. b = the unique thing x such that (x = b and Gx). Follows from 3, by G1.
7. b = the unique thing x such that (x = b and x ≠ a). Follows from 2, by G1.
1 and 4 stand for the same fact, namely F1. 2, 5, and 7 all stand for the same
fact, namely F2. And 3 and 6 stand for the same fact, namely F3. “The unique
thing x such that (x = a and Fx)” co-refers with “the unique thing x such that
(x = a and x ≠ b)”, since both expression refer to a. Therefore, 5 is what
results when the definite description in 4 is replaced with a co-referring
definite description. Therefore, 4 and 5 refer to the same fact. Since they
refer, respectively, to F1 and F2, it follows that F1 and F2 are the same fact.
“The unique thing x such that (x = b and x ≠ a)” co-refers with “the unique
thing x such that (x = b and Gx),” since both expressions refer to b.
Therefore, 7 is what results when the definite description in 6 is replaced with
a co-referring definite description. Therefore, 6 and 7 refer to the same fact.
Since they refer, respectively, to F3 and F1, it follows that F3 and F1 are the
same fact. Now, if G4 is wrong, then definite descriptions are not referring
terms, which case 5 is not what results when the definite descriptions in 4 is
replaced with a co-referring expression, and 7 is what not results when the
definite description in 6 is replaced with a co-referring expression. But

assuming that G4 is right, we’ve established that F1 = F2. Therefore F1 = F2 =
F3, and “Fa” therefore co-refers with “Gb” and also with “a ≠ b.” So,
assuming that definite descriptions are what they appear to be, viz. referring
terms, it follows there is only one fact.
As Neale points out, this result, if it is in fact true, is astonishing. But, as
Neale then points out, G2 allows us to go further. Let S and S* be any two
distinct statements that are true. (So S and S* needn’t have subject-predicate
form.) According to G2, S and be put in subject-predicate form, and so can
S*. Given any existing individual a, S can be rendered as “a is an x such that
S”; and given any existing individual b, S* can be rendered as “b is an x such
that S*.” And once that is granted, it follows, by the foregoing argument, that
S and S* stand for the same fact. It follows that, given G1-G4, any two true
sentences stand for the same fact.
Evaluating Neale’s argument: The problems with this argument are very
similar to the problems with Davidson’s. Consider line 4 of Neale’s
argument:
4. a = the unique thing x such that (x = a and Fx).
If this sentence is read attributively (in other words, if the definite
descriptions in them are treated as quantifiers, as opposed to referring terms),
then it is logically equivalent with
1. Fa,
in which case those two sentences can therefore be seen as standing for the
same fact. But if 4 is read referentially (in other words, if the definite
descriptions in them are treated as referring terms, as opposed to quantifiers),
then 4 stands for the same fact as:
4R: a = a,
in which case 1 and 4 cannot plausibly be seen as standing for the same fact.
For exactly similar reasons, 5, 6, and 7 must be read attributively if they can
plausibly be regarded as standing for the same facts as, respectively, 2, 3, and
4. In general, G1 is false if 4–7 are read referentially, 4–7 must therefore be
read attributively. Bottom line: Neale’s argument fails if 4–7 are read

referentially. It also fails, for obvious reasons, if they’re read attributively.
Sorites paradox: Any paradox like the following. Somebody with zero
dollars is poor. Giving one dollar to a poor person won’t make him stop being
poor. So, no matter how many times you give a dollar to a poor person, he
won’t stop being poor. Therefore, a person who has been given $500,000,000
dollars is poor. A sorites paradox always consists of a base-clause (e.g., “a
person with zero dollars is poor”), an inductive clause (e.g., “if a person with
n dollars is poor, so is a person with n + 1 dollars), and an obviously false
conclusion that seems to follow (e.g., “a person with a billion dollars is
poor”).”
Commentary: My solution to this paradox: Statements of the form “x is rich”
are elliptical for statements of the form “x is rich compared to y,” where y is
either some person or some benchmark. When the benchmark is identified,
the underlined sentence is seen to be false. If Frank is the person/benchmark
in question, and Frank has $1,000,000, then there is a number n (namely,
999,999.7) such that a person with n dollars is not rich and such a person with
n dollars is rich.
Special compositionality: A special form of compositionality, which we will
refer to as “special compositionality,” concerns reference. According to
special compositionality, what a referring term refers to is a function of what
its parts refer to. “The author of War and Peace” refers to one person. “The
author of Crime and Punishment” refers to someone else. Why do those
expressions refer to different people? Because War and Peace doesn’t refer
to the same book as Crime and Punishment. This shows that what “The
author of War and Peace” refers to depends on, and is thus “a function of,”
War and Peace refers to, and it shows the same thing mutatis mutandis to be
true of “The author of Crime and Punishment.” Given obvious extensions of
this argument, it follows that in general what referring terms refer to depends
on what their parts refer to. See “compositionality.”
Speech act[13]: Assertions are speech acts, and so are promises, orders,
exhortations, and so on. A rough definition of “speech act” is “any case of
somebody’s deliberately uttering or otherwise tokening a sentence.”
A person may produce a burst of noise, and know it to be a sentence, but
not thereby have performed a speech act. Knowing that you find loud “s”-

sounds completely intolerable, I shout out “snow sometimes symbolizes
sorrow” while in your presence. Even though I knew the noises I was making
to be a sentence-token, it wasn’t my intention in producing them to token a
sentence, and I therefore wasn’t performing a speech act.
Surd: A “surd” is anything that cannot coherently be supposed to exist. Thus,
square circles are surds, and so are events that pre-date themselves.
Though pedagogically effective, this definition is logically defective.
There exists nothing that cannot possibly exist. (There exists no object x such
that x cannot possibly exist. Thus, there is nothing to which, in saying that
“surds” are things that cannot possibly exist, we are saying that “surd” refers.
(There exists no x such that, in saying that the word “surd” refers to x, we are
saying that “surd” refers.)
The word “surd” can be non-defectively defined only in a circuitous
manner. For any property phi, the sentence ‹anything having phi is a surd,›
means that the laws of logic prohibit phi from being instantiated. (Given that
not all sentences containing the word “surd” have the form ‹anything having
phi is a surd,› this definition needs fine-tuning. But whereas the problems
with our initial definition were substantive, the problems with this definition
are merely technical.)
Supervenience: Two organisms that are microphysically exactly alike are
also biologically exactly alike. Thus, the microphysical locks the biological
into place. Put another way, the biological supervenes on the microphysical.
Two statues that are physically exactly alike are ipso facto aesthetically
exactly alike. Thus, the aesthetic supervenes on the physical. Two situations
that are physically and psychologically are ipso facol morally exactly alike.
Thus, the moral supervenes on the physical and the psychological (taken
together).
Synthetic knowledge: Knowledge is synthetic when what one knows is given
by a synthetic truth. See “synthetic truth.”
Synthetic truth: A statement is synthetic if it isn’t analytic. See “analytic”
and “synthetic knowledge.”
Tautology/truism: A tautology (or truism) is a trivially true statement—for
example, “there are three feet in a yard” or “Tuesdays come after Mondays”
or “there are two weeks in a fortnight.”

Theory of Descriptions: The position, first advocated in 1905 by Bertrand
Russell, that definite descriptions are not devices of reference and are instead
quantifiers. “The inventor of bifocals” seems to refer to Benjamin Franklin.
But “the inventor of bifocals snored” is true iff exactly one thing invented
bifocals, and any such snored. “Smith kicked the inventor of bifocals is true
iff exactly one thing invented bifocals, and Smith kicked any such thing.
What this shows is that, in virtue of containing an occurrence of “the inventor
of bifocals,” an expression encodes an existence-claim. This, in its turn,
suggests that “the inventor of bifocals,” and by parity of reasoning all other
definite descriptions, are quantifiers, not singular terms.
Truth: A true proposition is said to be one that “corresponds to the facts.”
But this statement is useless, since the expression “corresponds to the facts”
is as obscure as the expression “true.”
Given any proposition, there is some condition that is fulfilled if, and only
if, that proposition is true. Conditions may be identified with properties.
Therefore, truth may be identified with instantiatedness, and propositions
(i.e., the things that have the property of being true) are properties (or, strictly
speaking, sets there). See Chapter 3.
Many philosophers (e.g., Ayer, Hempel, Strawson, Wittgenstein) were, at
least at certain junctures in their careers, of the view that “truth” (and “true”
and other such terms) were meaningless. There is, it was said, no difference
between saying “the sentence ‘snow is white’ is true” and “snow is white”;
therefore, the words “it is true that” (and “it is a truth that,” and so on) are
useless. Wittgenstein was vehement in his advocacy of this viewpoint, which
is known as “deflationary” (or the “redundancy”) analysis of truth. The
deflationary analysis is false. If “white” meant “black,” but the English
language were otherwise unchanged, “snow is white” would be true in a
world where snow was black and false in a world where snow was white. So
(1) “snow is white”
is not equivalent with
(2) “the sentence ‘snow is white’ is true.”
(1) makes a statement about snow; it doesn’t say anything about language. (2)
makes a statement about language; it doesn’t say anything about snow. (2)
concerns the word “snow.” But snow isn’t a word; it’s a substance.

This brings us to next problem with the deflationary analysis. (2) is a true
statement. There is no way to make that statement without using the word
“true” or some equivalent. If you just say “snow is white,” you are not, as we
just say, saying anything about the word “snow.” (What you are saying, in
saying “snow is white,” would be true in a world where there were no words,
but where snow was white.)
Also, any sentence containing a quantifier contains an occurrence, if only
a phonetically unrealized one, of the word “true” or of some equivalent. To
say
(SD) “some dolphins can read”
is to say that
(SD) for some object x, the proposition x can read is true.
Truth-value: A true sentence has the truth-value true, and a false sentence
has the truth-value false. The truth-values true and false can be thought of as,
respectively, the property of being true and the property of being false.
If two sentences are both true or they are both false, they have the same
“truth-value.” So “1 + 1 = 2” and “2 + 2 = 4” have the same truth-value—
they have truth-value true. And so “1 + 1 = 3” and 
“2 + 2 = 5” have the same truth-value—the truth-value false.
Universal generalization: A sentence expresses a “universal generalization”
if the main connective of that sentence is a universal quantifier.[14] A
connective is an expression that, when given a sentence, or open sentence, or
ordered n-tuple of (open) sentences, yields a new sentence. Thus “and” is a
connective because, when given the pair of sentences (“grass is green,”
“snow is white”), it yields the sentence “grass is green and snow is white.”
(In what follows, “sentence” will be short for “sentence or open sentence of
ordered n-tuple of sentences or open-sentences.”)
Commentary: Many statements that seem to be conditionals are not, and are
instead universal generalizations. For example if a thing likes apples, it is
friendly, is a universal generalization, not a conditional. The reason: it’s
identical with the proposition: all things are such that they are friendly if they
like apples. Put another way, it’s identical with: for any x, if x likes apples, x
is friendly. Thus, the “main connective” of the sentence “if a thing likes

apples, it is friendly” isn’t “if,” and is instead “for any object x”; and for this
reason, it’s a universal generalization, not a conditional.
Utilitarianism: The doctrine that an act is morally correct to the extent that it
promotes human welfare, and morally incorrect to the extent that it
undermines it. See “consequentialism.”
Vagueness: See “ambiguity vs. vagueness.”
Valid: An argument is valid iff the conclusion cannot possibly be false, if
premises are true. A valid argument can have false premises. (For example:
Premise: All people have feathers. Premise: All things that have feathers
drink to excess. Conclusion: All people drink to excess.) A valid argument
with true premises is a sound argument. (For example: Premise: JMK has a
car. Premise: All cars are motorized vehicles. Conclusion: JMK has a
motorized vehicle.)
Validate: See “interpretation.”
Virtue theory: The doctrine composed of the following two assertions: (i) a
morally correct life is one in which one flourishes. (ii) One’s own flourishing
depends constitutively on one’s having character traits (or “virtues”) that
conduce to the flourishing of others.

[1]. In his (1976) paper “Can there be vague objects?” Gareth Evans says
that, according to a viewpoint that he rejects, “rather than being a
deficiency in our mode of describing the world, [vagueness] would be a
necessary feature of any true description of it.” For reasons of professional
ethics, I wish to bring the reader’s attention to the (unintentional, at least at
the level of consciousness) similarity between my wording and Evans’.
[2]. Contrary to what Quine alleged, Pierre Duhem (1861–1916) did not
put forth the so-called “Duhem-Quine” thesis.
[3]. Though I believe there to be a propositional analogue of it. See Chapter
3.
[4]. There isn’t really such a thing as the logical form of a sentence. What it
is that counts as a clarification of a sentence’s meaning depends in part on
what one’s starting-assumptions are. For example, if one takes the concepts
point, plane, and so on, as primitive, the sentence “x is the class of points
equidistant from a given point on a plane” might give the logical form of “x
is a circle.” If one doesn’t take those concepts as primitive, it might
abjectly fail to do so.
Also, given some language L that is expressively more powerful than
English, the L-sentence that would give the logical form of “snow is white”
would not be a direct translation of the English sentence that would do so.
So it could be sentence that the logical form of “snow is white” relative to L
isn’t identical with the logical form of “snow is white” relative to English.
(That said, I’m not entirely convinced that logical form is relative in this
way.)
[5]. For example, Peter Strawson in his otherwise brilliant (1950) paper “On
referring.”
[6]. The sentence “this is radically absurd” occurs in Russell’s (1903) book
Principles of Mathematics (PM). (It occurs in the chapter on Newton’s
laws of motion.) I rather fancy this sentence, and thus use it from time to
time. Ironically, the statement that Russell describes as “radically absurd”
in PM is, as I recall, quite a defensible one.
[7]. “SS” is short for “Slingshot.”
[8]. Advocates of this argument say that the true sentences refer to The
True, and that false sentences refer to The False. They don’t say what these
terms mean. In an effort to free their argument of needless obscurities and

indefensible assumptions, I’ve taken the liberty of assuming that they refer
to the properties of being true and false, respectively.
[9]. Give or take some irrelevant details, this argument was put forth by
Frege in his landmark paper On sense and reference.
[10]. See his paper “True to the facts,” in the (1984) collection of his
papers Essays on Truth and Interpretation.
[11]. Oxford University Press, 2005.
[12]. In what follows, I use actual quotation marks where I should, stricty
speaking, use quasi-quoatatoin marks.
[13]. To my knowledge, this term was coined by John Searle. It is the title
of his excellent (1969) book Speech acts.
[14]. Examples of universal quantifiers are “for all x,” “given any x,” “any
object,” “all objects,” and so on. (In general, a universal quantifier is an
expression E such that, in virtue of having the form ‹...E...›, a sentence
expresses a proposition to the effect that all members of some one class
are members of some other class. Thus, “for all x, if x is a dog, then x is a
mammal” is to the effect that every member of the class of dogs is a
member of the class of mammals.

